Clio and the Economics of QWERTY
PDF 쪽수 기준 · OCR

[[PAGE 1]]
Clio and the Economics of QWERTY
By PAUL A. DAVID*

[왼쪽 열]
Cicero demands of historians, first, that we
tell true stories. I intend fully to perform my
duty on this occasion, by giving you a homely
piece of narrative economic history in which
"one damn thinig follows another." The main
point of the story will become plain enough:
it is sometimes not possible to uncover the
logic (or illogic) of the world around us
except by understanding how it got that way.
A path-dependent sequence of economic
changes is one of which important influences
upon the eventual outcome can be exerted by
temporally remote events, including happen-
ings dominated by chance elements rather
than systematic forces. Stochastic processes
like that do not converge automatically to a
fixed-point distribution of outcomes, and are
called non-ergodic. In such circumstances
" historical accidents" can neither be ignored,
nor neatly quarantined for the purpose of
economic analysis; the dynamic process itself
takes on an essentialy historical character.
Standing alone, my story will be simply il-
lustrative and does not establish how much
of the world works this way. That is an open
empirical issue and I would be presumptuous
to claim to have settled it, or to instruct you
in what to do about it. Let us just hope the
tale proves mildly diverting for those wait-
ing to be told if and why the study of eco-
nomic history is a necessity in the making of
economists.
*Department of Economics, Encina Hall, Stanford
University, Stanford, CA 94305. Support provided for
this research, under a grant to the Technological In-
novation Program of the Center for Economic Policy
Research, Stanford University, is gratefully acknowl-
edged. Douglas Puffert supplied able research assistance.
Some, but not the whole, of my indebtedness to Brian
Arthur's views on QWERTY and QWERTY-like sub-
jects is recorded in the References. I bear full responsi-
bility for errors of fact and interpretation, as well as for
the peculiar opinions abbreviated herein. A fuller ver-
sion with complete references, entitled "Understanding
the Economics of QWERTY or Is History Necessary?,'
is available on request.

[오른쪽 열]
I. The Story of QWERTY
Why does the topmost row of letters
on your personal computer keyboard spell
out QWERTYUIOP, rather than something
else? We know that nothing in the engineer-
ing of computer terminals requires the awk-
ward keyboard layout known today as
"QWERTY," and we all are old enough to
remember that QWERTY somehow has been
handed down to us from the Age of Type-
writers. Clearly nobody has been persuaded
by the exhortations to discard QWERTY,
which apostles of DSK (the Dvorak Sim-
plified Keyboard) were issuing in trade pub-
lications such as Computers and Automation
during the early 1970's. Why not? Devotees
of the keyboard arrangement patented in
1932 by August Dvorak and W. L. Dealey
have long held most of the world's records
for speed typing. Moreover, during the 1940's
U.S. Navy experiments had shown that the
increased efficiency obtained with DsK
would amortize the cost of retraining a group
of typists within the first ten days of their
subsequent full-time employment. Dvorak's
death in 1975 released him from forty years
of frustration with the world's stubborn re-
jection of his contribution; it came too soon
for him to be solaced by the Apple IIC
computer's built-in switch, which instantly
converts its keyboard from QWERTY to
virtual DSK, or to be further aggravated by
doubts that the switch would not often be
flicked.
If as Apple advertising copy now says,
DSK "lets you type 20-40% faster," why did
this'superior design meet essentially the same
rejection as the previous seven improvements
on the QWERTY typewriter keyboard that
were patented in the United States and Brit-
ain during the years 1909-24? Was it the
result of customary, nonrational behavior by
countless individuals socialized to carry on
an antiquated technological tradition? Or, as
Dvorak himself once suggested, had there
332

Copyright @ 2001 All Rights Reserved

[[PAGE 2]]
ECONOMIC HISTORY

[왼쪽 열]
VOL. 75 NO. 2
been a conspiracy among the members of the
typewriter oligopoly to suppress an invention
which they feared would so increase type-
writer efficiency as ultimately to curtail the
demand for their products? Or perhaps we
should turn instead to the other popular
"Devil Theory," and ask if political regu-
lation and interference with the workings of
a "free market" has been the cause of ineffi-
cient keyboard regimentation? Maybe it's all
to be blamed on the public school system,
like everything else that's awry?
You can already sense that these will not
be the most promising lines along which to
search for an economic understanding of
QWERTY's present dominance. The agents
engaged in production and purchase deci-
sions in today's keyboard market are not the
prisoners of custom, conspiracy, or state con-
trol. But while they are, as we now say,
perfectly "free to choose," their behavior,
nevertheless, is held fast in the grip of events
long forgotten and shaped by circumstances
in which neither they nor their interests
figured. Like the great men of whom Tolstoy
wrote in War and Peace, "(e) very action of
theirs, that seems to them an act of their own
free will, is in an historical sense not free at
all, but in bondage to the whole course of
previous history..." (Bk. IX, ch. 1).
This is a short story, however. So it begins
only little more than a century ago, with the
fifty-second man to invent the typewriter.
Christopher Latham Sholes was a Milwau-
kee, Wisconsin printer by trade, and a me-
chanical tinkerer by inclination. Helped by
his friends, Carlos Glidden and Samuel w.
Soule, he had built a primitive writing ma-
chine for which a patent application was
filed in October 1867. Many defects in the
working of Sholes' "Type Writer* stood in
the way of its immediate commercial intro-
duction. Because the printing point was
located underneath the paper carriage, it was
quite invisible to the operator. " Non-visibil-
ity' remained an unfortunate feature of this
and other up-stroke machines long after the
flat paper carriage of the original design had
been supplanted by arrangements closely re-
sembling the modern continuous roller-
platen. Consequently, the tendency of the
typebars to clash and jam if struck in rapid

[오른쪽 열]
333
succession was a particularly serious defect.
When a typebar stuck at or near the print-
ing point, every succeeding stroke merely
hammered the same impression onto the
paper, resulting in a string of repeated letters
that would be discovered only when the typist
bothered to raise the carriage to inspect what
had been printed.
Urged onward by the bullying optimism of
James Densmore, the promoter-venture capi-
talist whom he had taken into the partner-
ship in 1867, Sholes struggled for the next six
years to perfect "the machine." From the
inventor's trial-and-error rearrangements of
the original model's alphabetical key order-
ing, in an effort to reduce the frequency of
typebar clashes, there emerged a four-row,
upper case keyboard approaching the mod-
ern QWERTY standard. In March 1873,
Densmore succeeded in placing the manufac-
turing rights for the substantially trans-
formed Sholes-Glidden "Type Writer" with
E. Remington and Sons, the famous arms
makers. Within the next few months
QWERTY's evolution was virtually com-
pleted by Remington's mechanics. Their
many modifications included some fine-
tuning of the keyboard design in the course
of which the “R" wound up in the place
previously allotted to the period mark ""
Thus were assembled into one row all the
letters which a salesman would need to im-
press customers, by rapidly pecking out the
brand name: TYPE WRITER
Despite this sales gimmick, the early com-
mercial fortunes of the machine, with which
chance had linked QWERTY's destiny re-
mained terrifyingly precarious. The eco-
nomic downturn of the 1870's was not the
best of times in which to launch a novel
piece.of office equipment costing $125, and
by 1878, when Remington brought out its
Improved Model Two (equipped with car-
riage : shift key), the whole enterprise was
teetering on the edge of bankruptcy. Conse-
quently, even though sales began to pick up
pace with the lifting of the depression and
annual typewriter production climbed to
1200 units in 1881, the market position which
QWERTY had acquired during the course
of its early career was far from deeply
entrenched; the entire stock of QWERTY-

Copyright @ 2001 All Rights Reserved

[[PAGE 3]]
AEA PAPERS AND PROCEEDINGS

[왼쪽 열]
334
embodying machines in the United States
could not have much exceeded 5000 when
the decade of the 1880's opened.
Nor was its future much protected by any
compelling technological necessities. For
there were ways to make a typewriter without
the up-stroke typebar mechanism that had
called forth the QWERTY adaptation, and
rival designs' were appearing on the Amer-
ican scene. Not only were there typebar
machines with "down-stroke" and "front-
stroke" actions that afforded a visible print-
ing point; the problem of typebar clashes
could be circumvented by dispensing with
typebars entirely, as young Thomas Edison
had done in his 1872 patent for an electric
print-wheel device which later became the
basis for teletype machines. Lucien Stephen
Crandall, the inventor of the second type-
writer to reach the American market (in 1879)
arranged the type on a cylindrical sleeve: the
sleeve was made to revolve to the required
letter and come down onto the printing-point,
Iocking in place for correct alignment. (So
much for the "revolutionary" character of
the IBM 72/82's "golf ball" design.) Freed
from the legacy of typebars, commercially
successful typewriters such as the Hammond
and the Blickensderfer first sported a key-
board arrangement which was more sensible
than QWERTY. Then so-called "Ideal" key-
board placed the sequence DHIATENSOR
in the home row, these being ten letters with
which one may compose over 70 percent of
the words in the English language.
The typewriter boom beginning in the
1880's thus witnessed a rapid proliferation of
competitive designs, manufacturing compa-
nies, and keyboard arrangements rivalling
the Sholes-Remington QWERTY. Yet, by
the middle of the next decade, just when it
had become evident that any micro-techno-
logical rationale for QWERTY's dominance
was being removed by the progress of type-
writer engineering, the U.S. industry was
rapidly moving towards the standard of an
upright front-stroke machine with a four-row
QWERTY keyboard that was referred to as
"the Universal" During the period 1895-
1905, the main producers of non-typebar
machines fell into line by offering " the Uni-
versal' as an option in place of the Ideal
keyboard.

[오른쪽 열]
MAY1985
II. Basic QWERTY-Nomics
To understand what had happened in the
fateful interval of the 1890's, the economist
must attend to the fact that typewriters were
beginning to take their place as an element
of a larger, rather complex system of produc-
tion that was technically interrelated. In ad-
dition to the manufacturers and buyers of
typewriting machines, this system involved
typewriter operators and the variety of
organizations (both private and public) that
undertook to train people in such skills. Still
more critical to the outcome was the fact
that, in contrast to the hardware subsystems
of which QWERTY or other keyboards were
a part, the larger system of production was
nobody's design. Rather like the proverbial
Topsy, and much else in the history of econ-
omies besides, it "jes' growed."
The advent of "touch" typing, a distinct
advance over the four-finger hunt-and-peck
method, came late in the 1880's and was
critical, because this innovation was from
its inception adapted to the Remington's
QWERTY keyboard. Touch typing gave rise
to three features of the evolving production
system which were crucially important in
causing QWERTY to become "locked in" as
the dominant keyboard arrangement. These
features were technical interrelatedness, econ-
omies of scale, and quasi-irreversibility of
investment. They constitute the basic in-
gredients of what might be called QWERTY-
nomics.
Technical interrelatedness, or the need
for system compatibility between keyboard
"hardware" and the "software" represented
by the touch typist's memory of a particular
arrangement of the keys, meant that the ex-
pected present value of a typewriter as an
instrument of production was dependent
upon the availability of compatible software
created by typists' decisions as to the kind of
keyboard they should learn. Prior to the
growth of the personal market for type-
writers, the purchasers of the hardware typi-
cally were business firms and therefore dis-
tinct from the owners of typing skills. Few
incentives existed at the time, or later, for
any one business to invest in providing its
employees with a form of general human
capital which so readily could be taken

Copyright @ 2001 All Rights Reserved

[[PAGE 4]]
ECONOMIC HISTORY

[왼쪽 열]
VOL. 75 NO. 2
elsewhere. (Notice that it was the wartime
U.S. Navy, not your typical employer, that
undertook the experiment of retraining typ-
ists on the Dvorak keyboard.) Nevertheless
the purchase by a potential employer of a
QWERTY keyboard conveyed a positive
pecuniary externality to compatibly trained
touch typists. To the degree to which this
increased the likelihood that subsequent
typists would choose to learn QWERTY, in
preference to another method for which the
stock of compatible hardware would not be
so large, the overall user costs of a typewrit-
ing system based upon QWERTY (or any
specific keyboard) would tend to decrease as
it gained in acceptance relative to other sys-
tems. Essentially symmetrical conditions ob-
tained in the market for instruction in touch
typing.
These decreasing cost conditions-or sys-
tem scale economies --had a number of con-
sequences, among which undoubtedly the
most important was the tendency for the
process of intersystem competition to lead
towards de facto standardization through the
predominance of a single keyboard design.
For analytical purposes, the matter can be
simplified in the foilowing way: suppose that
buyers of typewriters uniformly were without
inherent preferences concerning keyboards,
and cared only about how the stock of touch
typists was distributed among alternative
specific keyboard styles. Suppose typists, on
the other hand, were heterogeneous in their
preferences for learning QWERTY-based
"touch," as opposed to other methods, but
attentive also to the way the stock of ma-
chines was distributed according to keyboard
styles. Then imagine the members of this het-
erogenous population deciding in random or-
der what kind of typing training to acquire.
It may be seen that, with unbounded de-
creasing costs of selection, each stochastic
decision in favor of QWERTY would raise
the probability (but not guarantee) that the
next selector would favor QWERTY. From
the viewpoint of the formal theory of sto-
chastic processes, what we are looking at
now is equivalent to a generalized "Polya
urn scheme. In a simple scheme of that
kind, an urn containing balls of various col-
ors is sampled with replacement, and every
drawing of a ball of a specified color results

[오른쪽 열]
335
in a second ball of the same color being
returned to the urn; the probabilities that
balls of specified colors will be added are
therefore increasing (linear) functions of the
proportions in which the respective colors
are represented within the urn, A recent the-
orem due to W. Brian Arthur et al. (1983;
1985)' allows us to say that when a gener-
alized form of such a process (characterized
by unbounded increasing returns) is ex-
tended indefinitely, the proportional share of
one of the colors will, with probability one,
converge to unity.
There may be many eligible candidates for
supremacy, and from an ex ante vantage
point we cannot say with corresponding cer-
tainty which among the contending colors
--or rival keyboard arrangements-will be
the one to gain eventual dominance. That
part of the story is likely to be governed by
" historical accidents, which is to say, by the
particular sequencing of choices made close
to the beginning of the process. It is there
that essentially random, transient factors are
most likely to exert great leverage, as has
been shown neatly by Arthur's (1983) model
of the dynamics of technological competition
under increasing returns. Intuition suggests
that if choices were made in a forward-look-
ing way, rather than myopically on the basis
of comparisons among the curently prevail-
ing costs of different systems, the final out-
come could be influenced strongly by expec-
tations. A particular system could triumph
over rivals merely because the purchasers 'of
the software (and/or the hardware) expected
that it would do so. This intuition 'seems to
be supported by recent formal analyses by
Michael Katz and Carl Shapiro (1983), and
Ward Hanson (1984), of markets where
purchasers of rival products benefit from ex-
ternalities conditional upon the size of the
compatible system or "network" with which
they thereby become joined. Although the
initial lead acquired by QWERTY through
its association with the Remington was
quantitatively very slender, when magnified
by expectations it may well have been quite
sufficient to guarantee that the industry even-
tually would lock in to a de facto QWERTY
standard.
The occurrence of this "lock in" as early
as the mid-1890's does appear to have owed

Copyright @ 2001 All Rights Reserved

[[PAGE 5]]
AEA PAPERSAND PROCEEDINGS

[왼쪽 열]
336
something also to the high costs of software
"conversion" and the resulting quasi-irre-
versibility of investments in specific touch-
typing skills. Thus, as far as keyboard con-
version costs were concerned, an important
asymmetry had appeared between the soft-
ware and the hardware components of the
evolving system: the costs of typewriter
software conversion were going up, whereas
the costs of typewriter hardware conversion
were coming down. While the novel, non-
typebar technologies developed during the
1880's were freeing the keyboard from tech-
nical bondage to QWERTY, typewriter
makers were by the same token freed from
fixed-cost bondage to any particular key-
board arangement. Non-QWERTY type
writer manufacturers seeking to expand
market share could cheaply switch to achieve
compatibility with the already existing stock
of QWERTY-programmed typists, who could
not. This, then, was a situation in which the
precise details of timing in the developmen-
tal sequence had made it privately profitable
in the short run to adapt machines to the
habits of men (or to women, as was increas-
ingly the case) rather than the other way
around. And things have been that way ever
since.
II. Message
In place of a moral, I want to leave you
with a message of faith and qualified hope.
The story of QWERTY is a rather intriguing
one for economists. Despite the presence of
the sort of externalities that standard static
analysis tells us would interfere with the
achievement of the socially optimal degree of
system compatibility, competition in the ab-
sence of perfect futures markets drove the
industry prematurely into standardization on
the wrong system --where decentralized deci-
sion making subsequently has sufficed to hold
it. Outcomes of this kind are not so exotic.
For such things to happen seems only too
possible in the presence of strong technical
interrelatedness, scale economies, and irre-
versibilities due to learning and habituation.
They come as no surprise to readers pre-
pared by Thorstein Veblen's classic passages
in Germany and the Industrial Revolution

[오른쪽 열]
MAY1985
(1915), on the problem of Britain's under-
sized railway wagons and " the penalties of
taking the lead" (see pp. 126--27); they may
be painfully familiar to students who have
been obliged to assimilate the details of de-
servedly less-renowned scribblings (see my
1971, 1975 studies) about the obstacles which
ridge-and-furrow placed in the path of British
farm mechanization, and the inffuence of
remote events in nineteenth-century U.S. fac-
tor price history upon the subsequently
emerging bias towards Hicks' labor-saving
improvements in the production technology
of certain branches of manufacturing.
I believe there are many more QWERTY
worlds lying out there in the past, on the
very edges of the modern economic analyst's
tidy universe; worlds we do not yet fully
perceive or understand, but whose infuence,
like that of dark stars, extends nonetheless to
shape the visible orbits of our contemporary
economic affairs. Most of the time I feel sure
that the absorbing delights and quiet terrors
of exploring QWERTY worlds will suffice to
draw adventurous economists into the sys-
tematic study of essentially historical dy-
namic processes, and so will seduce them
into the ways of economic history, and a
better grasp of their subject.
REFERENCES
Arthur, W. Brian, "On Competing Technol-
ogies and Historical Small Events: The
Dynamics of Choice Under Increasing Re-
turns," Technological Innovation Program
Workshop Paper, Department of Econom-
ics, Stanford University, November 1983.
Arthur, W. Brian, Ermoliev, Yuri M. and Kanioy.
ski, Yuri M., " On Generalized Urn Schemes
of the Polya Kind,' Kibernetika, No. 1,
1983, 19, 49--56 (translated from the Rus-
sian in Cybernetics, 1983, 19, 61-71).
"Strong Laws
, and
for a Class of Path-Dependent Urn Pro-
cesses," in Proceedings of the International
Conference on Stochastic Optimization,
Kiev, Munich: Springer-Verlag, 1985.
David, Paul A., " The Landscape and the Ma-
chine: Technical Interrelatedness, Land
Tenure and the Mechanization of the Corn
Harvest in Victorian Britain,' in D. N.

Copyright @ 2001 All Rights Reserved

[[PAGE 6]]
ECONOMIC HISTORY

[왼쪽 열]
VOL. 75 NO. 2
McCloskey, ed., Essays on a Mature Econ-
omy: Britain after 1840, London: Methuen,
1971, ch. 5.
Technical Choice, Innovation and
Economic Growth: Essays on American and
British Experience in the Nineteenth Cen-
tury, New York: Cambridge University
Press, 1975.
Hanson, Ward A., " Bandwagons and Orphans:
Dynamic Pricing of Competing Techno-
logical Systems Subject to Decreasing

[오른쪽 열]
337
Costs," Technological Innovation Program
Workshop Paper, Department of Econom-
ics, Stanford University, January, 1984.
Katz, Michael L. and Shapiro, Carl, " Network
Externalities, Competition, and Compati-
bility," Woodrow Wilson School Discus-
sion Paper in Economics No. 54, Prince-
ton University, September, 1983.
Veblen, Thorstein, Imperial Germany and the
Industrial Revolution, New York: MacMil-
lan, 1915.

Copyright @ 2001 All Rights Reserved

[[PAGE 7]]
Copyright of American Economic Review is the property of American Economic Association and its content

[왼쪽 열]
may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express
written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.
