Cliometrics and the Nobel
PDF 쪽수 기준 · PDF text layer

[[PAGE 1]]
Journal of Economic Perspectives—Volume 9, Number 2—Spring 1995—Pages 191-208
Cliometrics and the Nobel
Claudia Goldin
111 October 1993, the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences awarded the
Nobel Prize in Economics to Robeit William Fogel and Douglass Ocil
North "tor having renewed research in economic history." The Academy
noted that "they were pioneers in the branch of economic history that has been
called the 'new economic history," or cliometrics." What is this cliometrics, and
how have these two Nobel Prize winners furthered the discipline of economics?
Cliometrics is, quite simply, the application of economic theory and quanti-
tative methods to the study of history. The term marries the muse of
history—Clio—to measurement aud was coined by Stanley Reiter, a mathemat-
ical economist then at Purdue University aTid a collaborator of two ot the tirst
cliometricians. Lance Davis and Jonathan Hughes.
History serves economics in various ways.' Most importantly, history is
essential because it is risky to base conclusions on transient phenomena. The
past, many economic theorists have discovered, is a giant experiment station for
economic ideas. And empiricists have learned that historical data are often
better (for example, because of less litigious environments) and provide larger
samples (that is, longer time series)." Ihe histories of the developed world are
backdrops, and often provide advice, for current developing countries. Finally,
remnants of the past, which shape the realm of the possible today, are always
'The many roles of historical economics are detailed in McCloskey (iy7fj).
'Oddly enongh, historical data are often better than current data. Thf absence of litigation is one
reason. For example, I have uncovered U.S. Department of Labor surveys from 1939 that asked
• Claudia Goldin is Professor of Economics, Harvard University, and Research Associ-
ate, National Bureau of Economic Research, both in Cambridge, Massachusetts. This
paper ims written while she was a Visiting Fellow at the Brookings Institution,
Washington, D.C.

[[PAGE 2]]
192 Journal of Economic Perspectives
Robert \V. Fogel Douglass C. North
with us as laws, norms, structures, institutions, and even people. In short, only
the oblivious can ignore history in modern economics, and only the unenlight-
ened would choose to do so.
Given the large domain of economic history, it should not he surprising
that Rohert Fogel and Douglass North are not the first Nohel Prize winners in
economics to study and use history. Milton Friedman used the past to under-
stand the role of money; John Hicks studied economic history to understand
economic growth; W. Arthur Lewis explored economic history as a hackdrop
for the problems of development; and Theodore Schultz examined it to learn
ahout htmian capital. Robert Fogel's mentor, Simon Kuznets, was an economic
historian in all these ways.
Yet Fogel and North do not simply join the list of stellar economists who
have used history. They are distinctive, hecause for them economic history is
not a handtnaiden of economics hut a distinct field of scholarship. Economic
history was a scholarly discipline long beibre it became cliometrics. Its practi-
tioners were economists and historians studying the histories of economies.
personnel oOicers (»l firms, "On vou discriminate on the basis otrace?" and "t.isi the jobs for which
you would never hire a man and those for which you would never hire a woman." Such questions
would not be asked today, for they provide "smoking-gun" evidence for civil rights suits. Historical
data also enable linkages that often cannot be done today because file.s are closed, sometimes for
almost a century. Robert Fogel's study of the Union Army veterans (discussed below) links veterans'
data to information from the U.S. cen.su.s of popuLilion manuscripts. "The 1920 census of popula-
tion manuscripts are the latest to have heen released.

[[PAGE 3]]
Claudia ('•oidin 193
Both called themselves economic historians. The new economic history, or
cliometrics, formalized economic history in a manner similar to the injection of
mathematical models and statistics into the rest of economics.
The Birth of the New Economic History
The revolution that brought the new economic history occurred in the
early 1960s. As in many such revolutions, the young were pitted against the
old. It would he fair to say that the more established members of the economic
history profession, many of whom were historians, controlled the Economic
History Association at least to the 1960s. However, Douglass North, a champion
of the new economic history, and William Parker became the editors of the
Journal of Economic History (the EHA's scholarly journal) in 1960, a post they
shared until 1966. The Journal of Economic History remained a journal read by
economic historians from both history and economics,^ whereas Explorations in
Entrepreneurial History (later Explorations in Economic HistoryV became and con-
tinues to be a major outlet for the new economic history.
The young turks, who included Fogel and North at the very outset, formed
their own scholarly meetings at Purdue University (Purdue Utiiversity had a
glorious decade of prominence in cliometrics). They called their field "the new
economic history," a term actually coined by Douglass North (Hughes, 1982),
The Cliometrics Meetings, as they became known, are still held annually and
have retained their open, argumentative, and exhilarating character.
The new economic history was able to blossom in the 1960s because its
foundations had recently been laid. A stock of quantitative knowledge pro-
duced by economists, many at the National Bureau of Economic Research, gave
economic historians a clearer sense of when economies grew and what the
sources of growth were. For example, a joint meeting in 1957 of the Economic
History Association and the National Bureau of Economic Research (Con-
ference on Research in Income and Wealth) produced a volume containing
• Robert Whaples (1991) lias quaiiiilied the cliometric revolution as redected in the coituiti ol ilic
Journal nf Enmomi<- Hi.stoij. He finds ihal the surge in cliomeirit ankles in the rej^ular issties of (he
JouriutI bfgan in the mid-l960,s, hul thai the "Tasks" issues (ptiblishcd papers from rhe KcDnomic
History Association meetings) lagged hchiiid, Arfitles based on the tliometric mclhodolo^' were
about 10 perccnl of the total in the regular issues in the 1956-60 period and 16 percent in ihe
1961-65 period. But they were 43 percent from 1966-70 and 72 percent from 1971-75. In ihe
" Tasks" issues they were 6 percent from 1956-60, Ifj percent from 1961-65, and Just 18 percent
trom 1966-70. They increased to 40 percent during 1971-75, That is, the methodology of ihe
research-oriented economic history community changed before that of the association's leadership,
who choose the papers for ihe annual meeting,
Explnrnltniii in Enlrepreneurial History was initially tinder the editorship of John Meyer, who was a
major spark to ihe cliometric revolution throtigh his paper with Alfred C^onrad, "The Economics oi'
Slavery in the .Antebellum South," which appeared in the Journal of Poliliral Economy ((Conrad and
Meyer, 1958). Ihis paper was originally presented at the momentotis joint EHA/NBER meeting
referred to below.

[[PAGE 4]]
194 Journal of Economic Perspectives
various data series, which formed the basis for much of the new economic
history (Parker, 1960). In that volume are Robert Gallman's estimates of
commodity output, Towne and Rasmussen's farm gross product and invest-
ment series, Ricbard Easterlin's regional income estimates, Stanley Lebergott's
wage series, Ethel Hoover's price index, Edward Budd's factor shares and
North's estimates of the balance of payments, all for the nineteenth-century
United States. North (1977) has credited the conference with spawning the new
economic history.
No longer did economic historians have to rely on series for particular
industrial commodities or those on international trade to proxy the entire
economy. The task of measurement was in no way complete, but enough
groundwork had been set to enable the flowering of an entire profession.
Formalization caused more of an uproar in economic history than else-
where in economics.' In most of empirical economics, more precise estimation
of economic relationships and more precision about what one was estimating
were viewed as progress. Btit in economic history there was considerable
resistance, fhose who were formalizing the field were viewed as otitsiders.
They were ec<momists, not historians or economic historians. The insiders
claimed the outsiders were theorists with little knowledge of the facts and with
no sense of history.
In large measure the opposition was intense because the modeling and
statistical methods were alien to many practitioners. But I believe that it was
also because the conclusions ran counter to orthodoxy. When economic history
was formalized, there was already a huge fossilized stock of accepted wisdom
concerning major projects, figures, and events of the past.*' Such accumulated
wisdom did not exist to the same degree in other fields of empirical economics.
The other empirical fields of economics were newer or had been less cumula-
tive. Tbe conclusions of one generation of economists in other fields, therefore,
could be overturned without mounting a major challenge to an entire field. If
one generation claimed labor supply functions were backward bending, but the
next estimated a positive supply elasticity using new data and methods, their
results could be reconciled by merely supposing that in the meanwhile the
underlying parameters had changed.
Ibe most important and immediate innovation from the formalization of
economic history was the "counterfactual." The most vivid example comes from
the work of Robert Eogel and concerns the first of his projects that was singled
•''There was similar opposition in industrial and labor relations, which also had a long history of
noneconomisl practitioners, when modern labor economics invaded its turf.
the conclusions of the new (U.S) economic history in the late 1950s and 1960s ihal ran
counter to orthodoxy are that the railroads were nol indispensable to economic growth (Kogel,
1964), railroads were nol built ahead of demand (Fishlow, 1965), President Jackson's banking
policies did not catise ihe economic turbtilence of the 1830s and 1840s (Temm, 1969), slavery was
not unprofitable (C)onrad and Meyer, 1958), the Civil War was not a major spur to the industrial-
ization of the northern states (Engerman, 1966), and the navigation acts could not directly have
caused the American Revolution (Thomas, 1965).

[[PAGE 5]]
Cliometrics and the Nobel 195
out by the Swedish Academy for recognition (Fogel, 1964). Historians had for
some time claimed that the railroad was the engine of economic growth in
nineteenth-century America. By stating that the railroads were essential to
growth, the historians were claiming that the railroads caused it. But if rail-
roads caused growth, then the growth would have been considerably less in the
absence of tbe railroads. Robert P'ogel restated tbese claims, then, as a "coun-
terfactual." The hypothesis was thus: had the railroads not been built, America
would have grown much more slowly. Fogel (1964), which will be discussed
more in the next section, is actually an extended thought experiment of what
the U.S. economy would have looked like if the railroads had never been built.
The notion of a counterfactual was hard for many historians to swallow. It
involved the hypothetical removal of ihe largest enterprise at the time, the first
big business in America, one of the most productive sectors, and some of tbe
wealthiest Americans, to mention just a few parts of the mental experiment.
But, noted Fogel, those who were making claims about the indispensability of
the railroad were implicitly invoking precisely this experiment. He was merely
making the claim explicit and subjecting it to hard evidence.
Robert Fogel and Douglass North have moved the discipline of economic
history in a similar manner. At the outset of their careers, their methodologies
and subject areas were quantitative in the National Bureau of Economic
Research tradition.' However, they have now emerged as rather dilleient
scholars with distinctive research methodologies. Fogel is the premier empiri-
cist, who estahlishes a fact and then establishes it over and over again until he is
confident he can persuade tbe most determined skeptic. Douglass Nortb is the
grand theorist, arbitraging between economic history and organization theory.
Fogel's current subject area investigates the nexus of nutrition, health, and
productivity. North's is the role of institutions and organizations in economic
growth, with particular reference to the countries of the former Soviet bloc. Yet
in their early works, one can see the fuller agenda they would eventually
pursue.
Early Work on Transportation
It is not much of a coincidence that Fogel and North both focused on
changes in the price of transportation. In the 1950s, a primarily theoretical
literature emerged conjecturing that economic growth could be enhanced by
decreased transport costs, at least under special circumstances. Even when
productivity cbange is moving at a snail's pace in tbe goods-producing sectors,
a decrease in tbe price of transportation can increase national income
Even though North's later work is mainly theoretical and abstract, his early contributions to
economic bistory were empirical, for example his estimates of the balance of payments,
freight rates, and import and export price indexes (North, 1961).

[[PAGE 6]]
196 Journal of Economic Perspectives
substantially." Developitig economies were advised to increase certain capital
expenditures if they wanted to grow, especially "infrastructure" and, most
especially, transportation. How decreased transport costs affected the economic
growth of the United States—the great success story—was a natural.^
Fogel's Railroads and American Economic Growth was an immediate classic.
Derived fiom his doctoral dissertation at Johns Hopkins University, it is a
volume in search of a single number^the social savings of the American
railroads in 1890.'" By the term "social savitigs," Fogel meant the increase in
social surplus from the decrease in transport costs. The most cited finding of
the book is the "interregional" social savings calculation, which pertains to the
large trunk lines that linked the food-exporting cities of the Midwest to the
food-importing cities of the East. Fogel calculated that if in 1890 the railroads
had not existed and if, in their stead, the four tiiajor agricultural goods (wheat,
corn, pork, and beef) were transported on existing water ioutes, gross national
product would have declined by less than 0.6 petcent. For those who believed
the great east-west railroads were indispensable to Atiierican economic growth,
the 0.6 percent ligure was a blow. The pieliminary results from the interre-
gional social savings calculation wet e presented by Fogel to the first Cliometrics
Meetings held at Purdue University in December I960. Etched in the memory
of all who attended was a presentation by this master debater, who would
deliver countless more presentations on the road to winning the Nobel.
Anyone who looks at a map of the United States, and thinks hard about the
concept of marginal cost, would ftnd the result on the interregional social
savings to be less surprising than it seemed in 19()(). Ihc United States has a lot
of navigable waterways, and the cost of water transportation was actually lower
than that for railroads, although water transport was slower and less reliable,
involved costly linkages, and retjuiied sotne land transport. Other countries
were not so fortunate, atid for them, the interregional social savings of the
railroads was gt eater. For example, Coatsworth (1981) carries out the parallel
calculations for Mexico.
In some sense the real cotitroversy, and the more difficult calculation,
concerned the social savings of the railroads within regions, termed the
"intraregional" social savings. Ihe intraregional calculation involved the
thought experiment of rem()\iiig all the tailroads that transported goods from
'*Siich "big pusb" theories, in whicb non-convexities dominate, have been given renewed aUention
recently (Mnrpliy, Sbleifer, and Vishny. 1989).
'*Boib Fogfl and Norib were infliirnced by tlu- work of Carter Goodricb (I960), wbo fmpbasized
the imporianre of govcrnnitiii iiifraslrticturt- invcsrmcnts to economic growth.
'"Kogfl's book also conccrnt-d tbe ihesLs ol VV. \V. Rostow (19(><)) tbat the railroad.s were a leading
sector in .Anifrican economic growtli. Because tbe railroad.s weie so large, tbeir growtb. according
to Rostow. pnlled along oilier sectors. Fogel demonstrates ibal ihe railroads consumed only a small
fraction of tbe nation's iron, coal, and lumber production and, ibereioie. ibar tbey were not a
leading sector in tbe manner hypothesized by Rosiow.
Given the importance of the subject, it is not surprising that Fogel's was not tbe only doctoral
dissertation written on railroads in tbe early 1960s. Albert Fisblow's (1965) concerned an earlier
hislorv of tbe railroiids. and he came lo soinewbat dilTerenl conchisioiis.

[[PAGE 7]]
Claudia Goldin 197
farms to the markets of the Midwest and computing how much gross national
product would have dechned. Ihe railroads had more costly alternatives here
than they did for the long-haul routes. 1 here were some navigable waterways,
to be sute, bul there were also considerable distances to tnove goods over land,
a costly venture before the gasoline engine and ti ucks.
Fogel (19(i4) made four calculations ot the within-tegion social savings,
depending upon various assumptions concerning the alternative mode of
transportation and the area cultivated." The alternative mode.s involved either
existing water or land toutes, along with a set of canals that would, according to
P'ogel, probably have been built had the lailroads not existed. Fogel also
pointed out that with higher costs of transportatioti, it would not have been
cost-effective to cultivate some aieas of the country. A reasonable calculation,
then, takes out from cultivation lands that wete beyond the feasible margiti but
adds back into the social savings the loss in net income fiom those lands.'^ The
intraregional social savings estimated in this tiianner is about 1 percent of 1890
GNP.
Thus, the total social savitigs from shipping agricultural commodities both
between and inside regiotis cotnes to less than 2 percent of GNP in 1890.
Agt icultural cotnmodities, by ton-miles shipped, were about one-fourth of all
goods shipped by rail, but there is no obvious reason to multiply the agricul-
tural social savings figure by a factor of exactly four. Fogel omitted, too, the
social savings of the railroads in passenger travel. But on the other side of the
balance sheet, the calculation does not include the probability that the internal
combustion engine would have been invented and commercialized sooner in
the absence of the railroad.
Fogel has noted that his original dissertation proposal called for measuritig
how large the social savings of tbe tailroads were and that he was truly startled
when he discovered the savings were small. Btit whether or not one views the
social savings as large or stiiall is in the eye of the beholder. It was small in
comparisoti with the claitns of those who came before Fogel. But it may be
viewed as large in comparison with the social savitigs from any other single
mechanical device in U.S. history. Whatever the judgment on relative magni-
tude, Kogel oflered a most careftil atid tneticulous estimate of the actual size.
Douglass North's best ktiown reseatch iti transportation concerns ocean
shipping from 1600 tu 1860. The costs of ocean shipping dectea.sed during
much of the period, more so in the nineteenth century than belbte. A laige
part of the decrease, argued North (1968), came from an increase in total factor
productivity. But the question was whether total factor productivity gains were
P"(.mr takiilations are empliasi/cd in (lie hook, allliimgh six art' actually made. There are ihree
assiiniptioiis lor thf alternative transportaiion network: no change, build more canals, and resur-
face road.s, of which the first two are emphasized in the book. There are two assumptions for the
amount of land in cultivation: use all existing land in cultivation, and use only that within the
ft-iisible margin.
"If those lands weie left in (ultivation, ihen the social savings of the railroad is inllated, be(au.se
withoiir ilic railroad, goods would be shipped east at a total unit cosi greater than their unit price
in the niarkel.

[[PAGE 8]]
198 Journal of Economic Perspectives
rooted in technological advances or some other innovation. North found that
from 1600 to 1784 productivity advanced at a slow rate, hut that virtually all of
the gains were due to decreased crew size and less time spent idle in ports.
For the period from 1814 to 1860, productivity increased faster, at almost 10
times the annual rate in the previous two centuries. Virtually all the gain here
was due to an increase in the size of ships and to their greater load tactor. For
most of the two and a half centuries considered, goods coming from the New
World to the Old World were bulky raw materials, whereas those moving in the
other direction were compact manufactured goods. In the 1840s and 1850s,
however, there was a large increase in immigration, which meant that ships
returned to the New World with cargo, not in ballast. The load factor therehy
increased.
The surprising finding is that for both periods, technological change was
less responsible for the increase in prodtictivity than were other innovations—a
sharp reduction in piracy and organizational changes that increased round-trips
per year by a factor of three.'* With less piracy, ships needed fewer crew
members and could carry more goods and fewer armaments. With less need to
arm ships, technologically superior vessels could be used. For example, the
Dutch "flute," a sailing vessel with a rounded stern, had been used in the Baltic
long before the modified flute made it to the ocean. But the reason these
superior vessels were used in the Baltic was that piracy had been significantly
reduced there, and the flute generally carried no armament. The important
point for economic history and for North's intellectual development is that
institutions interact with technology. One without the other does not produce
economic growth. North learned the lesson well and shifted his attention for
the next 25 years to a study of institutions.
In their work on transportation, both Fogel and North did case studies
exploring whether growth occurs hecause a particular sector takes off or
because of a larger set of changes across many sectors. The answer, fr-om Fogel,
was that the sector identified with growth—that of railroad transport—was not
solely or primarily responsihle. Rather it was the contributions of many sectors.
North's answer was that even if one sector pulled the economy along, the path
of development depended crucially on institutions that, in turn, derived from
the distribution of income, culture, and politics.
On the Economic Impact of Slavery
An area of greater overlap between the works of North and Fogel is the
impact of slavery on the growth of the American South. In the midst of a
Hartey (1988) offers a strongly dissenting view. Harley disagrees with North's conclusion because
he disputes the frciglii rate series on which North's work rests. Accordinf^ lo Harley, transpnrtation
rates decreased only trivially before 1850 and then quite rapidly with the adoption of the metal
steamship. North's freight rates decline more continuously, claims Harley, because they refer
largely to the shipment of cotton, and here the lighter packing ol ihe good lowered costs of
shipment.

[[PAGE 9]]
Cliometrics and the Nobel 199
growing industrial nation with a mobile and free labor force sat an agricultural
slavocracy. Nortb's volume The Economtc Growth oj the United States, 1790-1860
(1961) and Fogel and Stanley Engerman's Time on the Cross (1974), as well as
Fogel's Without Consent or Contract (1989), all explore differential regional
grcjwtb.
After the American Civil War the North was economically vibrant; the
South was, hy national standards, economically backward. But in 1860, per
capita income was actually higher in the South than in the Midwest, another
agricultural and rural region. Income per capita in the South decreased in real
terms from 1860 to 1880 and did not regain its previous level until about 1900.
Fven as late as the 1920s, southern income per capita was less than 60 percent
of the U.S. average. The southern economy apparently collapsed after the Civil
War and did not recover for almost a half century. Such economic deterioration
could not have been due to the war itself. Rather, it must have had something
to do with the institutions existing in the South hefore the American Civil War.
According to Douglass North, the roots of southern stagnation are to be
found in the geographic patterns of trade in the antehellum period. The South,
using slave labor, grew cotton and exported it to the American North and to
Britain. With the receipts from its northern shipments it purchased ibodstuHs
from the Midwest and indu.strial goods from the North." With its receipts from
Furopean shipments, it purchased luxury items and other industrial wares.
Little was ploughed back into the South as internal improvements. Schooling
was denied slaves and was poorly provided to southerners in general. Cities,
those generators of agglomeration economies, were rare in the South. Innova-
tion was thereby stifled.
The North ran a very different ship. With far more equality of income and
wealth, northerners purchased goods produced hy local tradesmen and local
firms. Its funds were ploughed back into local industry and internal improve-
ments. Its people were the best educated in the world. The North established
institutions that served an egalitarian society and that furthered an industrial
and growing region. The South had norms that reinforced a caste and race-
based society and that inhibited growth at the service of a master class. Such
institutions have long lives.
The message, repeated in many of Douglass North's later works, is that
when institutions serve to enrich one group (masters, feudal lords) at the
expense of another (slaves, serfs), it does not matter that these institutions also
reduce the potential income of the elite. Pareto-improving trades are generally
impossihle between the two groups, and thus there is no assurance that more
efficient institutions will drive out less efficient ones.
Tbe view tbat there was extensive trilateral irade among tbe three regions—the North, the
South, and the Midwest— in the antebellum period was cballenged by several economic historians
on the basis of actual trade flow data and the production of foodstulTs on southern farms. Ail but
tbe very smallest southern farms were actually scU-sufikifnt in agricultural commodities prior to
I860.

[[PAGE 10]]
200 Journal of Economic Perspectives
Robert FogcI's tnany volumes on the South and slavery explore why the
South was rich before the Civil War, and thus why emancipation greatly
reduced iticome per capita. In 1860, southern income per capita (including
slaves) was 57 percent of the per capita income of the urhan industt iai North,
and 116 percent of the tnore rutal and agricultural Midwest. If slaves ate
allotted a mere suhsistence statidard of living, then per capita income for the
rest of the South would rise to 98 percent of northern, and 200 percent of
midwestern income. Free southerners, then, were relatively rich in the antebel-
lum period. How did the South achieve its economic position hefore the Civil
War antl how did it lose it? Fogel focuses on the first question, for his ititerests
were mainly iti the role of slavery in the antebellum economy and the manner
iti which it itilluenced the material condition of slaves.
He and ccjauthot Engerman asked whether slaves worked more intensively
than did free laborers and whether large plantations were more efficient than
smaller cotton fattns. The evidence revealed substantial economies of scale, but
the economies of scale were reaped only on slave plantations.'' Plantations with
more than 15 slaves produced about 40 percent tnote output per unit input
than did farms with no slaves or fartiis with fewer than 15 slaves. The key was
gang labor on plantations and the more effective use of all slaves around the
seasons, as well as the old, the infirm, pregnant women, and children. Southern
farms utilized slaves efficiently by tiieshing the seasons for cotton and corn, the
care of livestock and buildings, and the production of manufactured goods,
such as shoes and clothing. The South was actually self-sufficient in the
production of foodstuffs in the antebellum period.'^' The hypothesized triangu-
lar trade atnong the South, the North, and the West did not exist at the scale
most imagined (including Douglass North). Slavery stified the growth of indus-
trial firms and cities iti the South, but not the way most thought. Slaves were
not incotiipatible with cities and industry. Rather, they had a strong compara-
tive advantage in the production of cotton.
Fogel's research revealed slavery's harshness and cruelty. Yet even though
slavery was a brutal labor system, the prosperity of the antebellum Soutb may
have benefited N<ji th Atiierican slaves who lived longer lives, achieved greater
physical stature, and had better living conditions than their bound counter-
parts in the rest of the New World, such as Latin America and the Carihbean.
Although Fogel's conclusions about the South are rather dilterent from
North's, their views of the regional differences are compatible. At the heart of
• Foge! and Eiifrfrman (1977) revise rheir original estimates of the relative efTiciency of slave
agricullure increasing the size of slave plantation.s subject to economies of scale. Their earlier
estimates, presented in Fogel and Engcrtiian (1974). showed productivity declining after lfi slaves,
whereas the new estimates, which nci out locational renis on farms, have increasing productivity
throughotit the range. The view that extensive scale economies existed is not shared by ali scholars
of the antebellum and postbellum South. See, for example, Gavin Wright (1979). Some of the
debate centers on the 1859 cotton-crop yield. See Fogel and Engerman (1980) for a response to
Wright's piihil ihat cotlon yields were abnormally high in 1859 and therefore that larger farms,
wliich })rodN(ed relatively more cotlon. apprared exceptionally ellicieni in that year.
'One (.akulaiioii of ihe self-sufliciencv of southern iarms was made bv Robert Clallman (1970).

[[PAGE 11]]
Claudia (.oldin 201
Fogel's explanation is a very Northian point that organizational innovations
allowed an oppressive institution to flourish, The Soiuh may have heeu a rich
farming area in the antehellum period, but its wealth rested on slave labor. In
the absence of slavery, production plummeted. The different paths to develop-
ment taken hy the agricultural South and the agricultural Midwest point to the
persistence of norms, laws, traditions, and oiganizations that retained inequal-
ity iu the South and implicitly taxed both rich and poor.
Recent Writings
The final chapters iu the writings of North and Fogel are likely to he
considered their finest achievements. North's most recent writings are a contin-
uation of an agenda he began in the early 1970s. Rohert Fogel's build on his
work since the mid-1970s.
North's current agenda concerns the role of institutions in economic
growth. One can see a glimmer in his studies of transportation and antebellum
growth. Economists have recently become aware that the rules ot economic and
social interaction determine ec()nomic outcomes more than the stock of re-
sources and the level of technology, Other parts of the world, for example, had
even more ahundant natural resources than did North America. Yet the United
States engineered a more intensive exploitation of its natural resources than
did any other nation in the nineteenth centtiry. The reason had to do with its
institutions, particularly those pertaining to property rights. North began liis
exploration of these ideas in Institutional Change and American Economic (•roivth
(1971), cowritten with Lance Davis.
The United States was a great success story in large measure because of its
pedigree. It inherited its private property laws from FLngland, but because of
Fnglish domination, it also learned to detest strong central government. Davis
and North explore how various unique American institutions served to encour-
age economic growth and how Madison's eflbrt (througli Federalist Paper #10
and the Constitution) to control interest groups was eventually in vain. In two
volumes, The Rise of the Western World (1973, with Robert Paul lhomas) and
Structure and Change in Economic Hi.stoty (1981), North investigated world history
in this light, The principal question in these volumes is why Europe failed to
grow in a sustained manner from 900 to 1700, yet succeeded after.
Although economic growth was not sustained for long during the 900 to
1700 period, important institutional changes occurred that eventually led to
the breakthroughs of the eighteenth century. Changes in military technology
led to increases in the optimal size of the manor. Population increase led to the
settlement of the areas between manors, and more settled land brought greater
order and even cities. F"eudal areas that weie initially unconiicdcd and
self-sufficient now traded. Markets expanded and regions specialized. Witli
goods and factors entering markets, traditional feudal dues and leaky were

[[PAGE 12]]
202 Jounial of Economic Perspectives
abandoned. And with expanded markets there was more need for a larger unit
—the nation-state—to assume the function of securing order. Nation-states
ofteti set down t ules govei'tiing property rights attd laws that gave incentives to
innovation. Increased trade withiti and among the tiew nation-states was a
further fillip to the flowering that was to come in the eighteenth century.
North tetninds us that war and rebellion were widespread in fourteenth-
and fifteenth-century England and that nothing guaranteed the success of
England. The rise of Parliament was crucial. Without Parliament there would
have been no private property guarantees, and without that institutional
change, innovation would have been stilled. Why a Parliament tose in England,
but not in Spain or France, cannot be ascribed to one factor but to several that
hinge on England's island status. Because foreign invasion was not a serious
threat, the power of the tnonarch was less important in Etigland. Because an
export—wool^—^could be taxed with little evasion, a large bureaucracy was not
essential. As North (1981, p. 156) notes regarding the rise of Parliament, "Had
such a shift not occurred, the economic history of England would have been
much diftierent."
The critical elemetit in North's story, telling of the emergence of the
modern, is the ititerplay between structural change and technological change.
Technological change blossomed, not so much because people got smarter, but
because they were enabled to reap greater rewards as markets expanded and
property rights were better defined and defended. North at gues that increases
in the conventional factors used to explain economic growth imply that an
economy has the capacity to grow. They do not theiefore explain why growth is
absent in particular countries or at pat ticular times. Saying that countries grow
because they increase their stock of capital is, according to North, hke saying
that people are rich because they have money.
One of my favorite of Douglass North's pieces is "Ideology and the Free
Rider," a chapter in Structure and Chcmge in Economic History (North, 1981). We
all live in a Hobbesian world, he argues, and the only way economies can
operate near the frontier is to keep nasty behavior in check, Governments are
organized to do that. Laws governing behavior are set down, governments are
given the authority to police, incentive-compatible contracts are drawn up, and
so on. But itidividuals can still engage in behavior that undermines the very
foundations of the system. In the absence of truly Draconian measures, we will
have social chaos and economic collapse.
Ideology, says North, has kept such behaviors in check. All civilized
societies have cultivated particular ideologies (by which is meant belief systems),
such as those making families primary, those bonding individuals to groups
(such as families, communities, tribes, clans), and those conferring social oppro-
brium on individuals who engage in various behaviors. Stealing alters economic
incentives and imposes negative externalities on everyone. Thus the person
who steals is a free rider. Ideology and norms ate a tneans of reducing such
behavior by imposing extralegal penalties on the perpetrator and their kin.

[[PAGE 13]]
Cliometrics and the Nobel 203
According to North, the clionietric revolution helped economic historians
make progress in understanding why economies perform favorably, given
institutions, hut not what the role of institutions is. With an enabling structure,
capital can accumulate, innovation can flourish, and economic growth can be
sustained. Without it, nothing. North (1990, p. 3) would like to return eco-
nomic historians to one of their original tasks—understanding the "humanly
devised constraints that shape human interaction," whether they he laws,
norms, ideology, government agencies, constitutions, codes of hehavior, reli-
gion, or conventions. The difficult part is the dynamics of institutional change
and whether and how these structures and institutions change for the good of
all. That is the task of future work.
For the past 20 years, Robert Fogel has turned his attention to demogra-
phy and economics. The project is large, far-reaching, and a challenge to
summarize. It has involved scholars frotn economics, history, medicine, physiol-
ogy, demography, and statistics, and a data collection that is the largest ever in
the field of ecotiomic history and one of the largest that has heen privately
amassed in economics.'^ It covers several centuries and continents. The re-
search, like North's, is ongoing. The nnost massive of the data sets, that on the
Civil War pension records, is still heing collected.
The project explores the relationship between economic resources and the
standard of living. The standard of living includes health, a multidimensional
quantity incorporating morbidity and mortality. The central question is when
and how the world's people improved their health, and how health in turn
enhanced productivity. The first part of the project, pertaining primarily to
North America, sunimari/x's much of Rohert Kogel's work to the mid-1980s
(Fogel, 1986; F"<3gel et al., 1983). America was rich in resources, with a relatively
high standard of living from at least the eighteenth century onward, overtaking
France on a per capita basis early in the nineteenth century and Britain
somewhat later. But international comparisons of standards of living are diffi-
cult, both now and then. Comparisons of one aspect of the standard of living
over time and across countries—^health—may not he so difficult. The early
work on the project was directed to measuring aspects of health—adult height,
the adolescent growth spurt, mortality, and birth weight, to mention a fiew—for
much of American history and the histories of various European countries as
comparisons.
Some of Robert Fogel's research has bcfii funded by U.S. government grants, but much lias been
supported by private (oundation.s and universities.
As in other fields in economics and in tbe .science.s in general, advances in computer
technology in the 1960s provided a spur to empirical work in economic history. This Iactor may
explain tbe growtb of tbe new economic history in ibf 1960s and t970s. New computer tecbn(jlogy
has fostered tbe collection ol large bistorical samples. Kor example, Fogel's Union Army sample
would not bave been possible witboui tbe personal computer. The collection of extensive new
bodies of historical evidence is a central goal of Fogel's research, as it was during his tenure as
Program Director of tbe Development of the American F.conomy Program at the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

[[PAGE 14]]
204 Journal of Economic Ferspeclives
The results have heen astonishing. Native-born American men were as tall
on the eve of the American Revolutioti as they were oti the eve of the American
Civil War, and as tall as they were on the eve of World War II. But the
foreign-horn men who fought on the American side during the Revolution
were almost two inches shorter than the native-born, as were the British they
fought. Birth in the American colonies, particularly in the South, endowed men
with nutrients and calories to enable them to reach adult heights that were high
even by twentieth-century standards.
Why the adult height of native horn American men did not rise is puzzling.
One possihility (and I note again that the research is ongoing) is that native-horn
Americans were sometimes nonetheless the sons of foreign-horn women. Physi-
ological studies show that stunted adults (here, undernourished European
women) give birth, on average, to young who are relatively stunted. Fogel also
argues that the Industrial Revolution and the disease, environment is another
part of the story. Fogel and his colleagues have amassed considerable evidence
that heights and life expectancy (conditional on reaching age 20) actually cycled
during mtich of the nineteenth century. Rising real incomes may not have heen
experienced hy the hulk of the working-class population. Crowding in the
nation's burgeoning cities and the large influx of immigrants in the 1840s tnay
have heightened the disease environment; greater work intensity in factories
during the 1830s and 1840s may have increased the need for calories and
protein. With more of the population removed from food supplies, and refrig-
eration and improved transportation decades away, it seems plausible that the
Industrial Revoltition decreased some elements of the standard of living for a
growing subsection of the American populatioti.
The second, and the more ongoing, portion of Fogel's project concerns
both long-term trends in Europe and the data on the Civil War veterans (Fogel,
1994). It seems to uncover the relationship between early nutritional depriva-
tion and later productivity and health outcomes. It rests on evidence from
medical and physiological studies underscoring the importance of height and
body mass in improving life expectancy, and that chronic conditions at older
ages result from early nutritional deprivation, the impact of which may remain
concealed for decades.
Before the nineteenth century, most European populations were severely
undernourished. Frenchmen around 1790, for example, were probahly two-
thirds their current hody weight and four inches shorter. Although they were
hoth sttiiited and wasted, they would have heen even more undernourished
had they been taller. Fogel emphasizes that height serves as a crucial equilibrat-
ing mechanism across generations, adjusting to food supplies, work intensity,
and the disease environment. But even with the equilibration of height, those
who are stunted still have a greater incidence of chronic disease and lower life
expectancy. (Jiven the cahnies available and their distrihution, 20 percent of
the Fretich popttlation iu 1790 could do little more than beg. A large amount of
economic growth, therefore, was due to increased nourishment ot the popula-

[[PAGE 15]]
(Claudia (iolditi 205
tion. Fogel estimates for Britain that one-third of the increase in growth per
capita from 1790 to 1980 was due to increased nutrition. How tnore food got
produced is another question.
Almost all able-bodied young men were drafted to serve in the U.S. Utiioti
Army, and the pension frotn the Union Army sttpported large tittmbers of men
in their old age during the early twentieth cetitury. Fogel's team is linking the
Union Army draft records backward in time to the 1850 and 1860 federal
popttiation censuses to obtain information on the family of origin. The records
are then linked forward to veterans' records and Utiion Army pensions. Finally
the recoids are linked to the 1900 atul 1910 federal poptilation censuses to get
information on labor fbtce status in old age, The conclusion is that illness is
more likely the shortei" the adult and the lower the adult's body mass, both
today and in the Union Artiiy sample. Nutritional advances, not just medical
technology, have reduced the incidetice of chrotiic diseases and may also have
reduced death atid ill health from contagious disease. Increased nutrition was
responsible for a huge proportion of the increase in life expectancy until the
mid-twentieth century, when advatices in medical techtiolog) become instiu-
mental. Better-nourished people have less chronic disease, are less susceptible
to contagious disease, and are considerably more productive.
Fogel's emphasis on the health risks of low body mass may strike many in
our low-cal, thin-is-in, diet-happy titnes as odd. An optititum weight (given
height) exists, and a stibstantial fraction of Americans have gone beyond it. But
for most of world history atid iti much of the developing world today severe
stunting atid low body mass seriously litnit life. How those in the developed
world escaped frotii hunger has been foremost in Fogel's tesearch agenda
(Fogel, 1992).
The works of F(jgel and of North have relevance for both economic policy
and ecotiomic theory. Fogel's shottid catttion those making health care policy
not to rely on short-tertii series coticcrning life expectancy, to pay attention to
the nutritional and hidden causes of chionic disease, and to consider the
productivity effects of a healthier population. It contains implicit warnitigs to
the governtnents of poor countries and the agencies of rich countries attempt-
ing to assist them. Distributional factors, not the aggregate lack of food, are
often to blame for famines; fatnities have repcrctissions that ofteti last lor
getierations; eveti when body tnass is optimal for height, stunting has serious
consequences later iti life and lowers life expectancy; and stunting is caused
more by day-to-day nutritional deficieticies than by catastrophic events such as
fatnines. North's work directs the etiietgitig nations of easterti Europe and the
forttter Soviet Union to reconsidet their slructittes atid institutions as they
embrace other reforms. He also catitiotis tlieir advisors that Western organiza-
tiotial forms will not function properly without enabling norms and ideologies.
His work has considetable relevance in organization theoty atid game theory.
North (1990) ptovides a menu of institutions and guidance about how they
fared.

[[PAGE 16]]
206 Journal of Economic Perspectives
Conclusions
The birth of cliometrics brought econotiiic history into the discipline of
economics. It subjected its claims to the same standards of proof hy which
others in economics had to abide. It used the same models and statistical tools,
and often better and more critically examined data. But as iu other revolutions,
unanticipated repercussions occurred. One is that few departments of history
now have economic historians at all; in effect, the new economic historians
extinguished the other .side. The intent, however, was to proselytize, not
obliterate. Why the unintended consequence arose had as much to do with the
history profession, as that of economics.
A second consequence is of greater significance to the field of economics. It
used to be that economic history was a requirement for the doctorate in the
premier departments, but as economic history began to use the same tools as
other specialties, many believed the economic history requiretnent for the
doctorate could be abolished without consequence. The young turks had taken
a discipline that had a unique place in economics and made it appear familiar
to all economists. Familiarity did not breed contempt, but it had almost as
harmful an effect. Economic historians were after some time no longer viewed
by many economists as a distinct group. One economic historian recently went
so far as to argue that cliometricians engineered the "end of economic history.""*
The work of Fogel and North, however, suggests the opposite. Economic
history is not a quaint nor outdated field, but a highly relevant one. Both Fogel
and North concentrated their early efforts on transportation and market
integration to understand the development of U.S. and European economies.
But they also pursued these topics because they were foremost in the minds of
policymakers in the 1950s and 1960s. Fogel's work on slavery revealed why the
antebellum South was so rich and how slaves contributed to high productivity
that would decline with emancipation. But it was written in large measure to
expose an important piece of the current American dilemma.
Economic historians today aie primarily concerned witli economic growth,
the persistence of institutions, and the roots of current economic issues. In the
past, it was the tbcus on institutions that made economic historians appear to be
distinctive. Because that knowledge is now subject to the same rigor as some
other economics does not mean that it is any less special and certainly does not
mean that economic historians possess less of it. Economic historians who came
before the cliometric revolution distinguished themselves by mastering a wide
array of facts and by their knowledge of institutions. But without the rigor of
economics and econometrics, they sometimes built on faulty reasoning. Because
theories were not tested properly, important data were otten overlooked. By
This is ihc title of C:hristina R(»mei's I99.'i lalk on "Recent Developments in Economic History,"
delivered to the American Economic A.ssociation (Romer. 1994), However, I do not helieve that she
meant the title as a literal statement about the field.

[[PAGE 17]]
Cliometrics and the Nobel 207
bringing economic history into modern economics, cliometricians have not
ended ecotiomic history. On the cotitrary, they have brought it to a higher
plane.
Most fields of economics can be viewed as particular segments of a general
equilibrium system. Labor economics analyzes the labor market, industrial
organization deals with the goods market, public Hnancc studies the goverti-
ment, and so on. Economic historians, however, consider the etitire system. To
use an analogy from medicine, economic historians are family practitioners, not
specialists, and like the family doctor they follow the patient over the long run.
Economic history is, like other fields of economics, unified hy a common set of
questions. But in economic history the questions typically concern how whole
economies have developed, why some grew while others did not, atid what the
consequences of economic growth have been. In this way, econotnic history is
very much related to development economics.
What is it then that makes economic historians, such as Robert Fogel and
Douglass Notth, unique among economists? It is not that they study the past,
use historical data, exploit the past for natural experiments, use a particular
methodology, are open to the ideas from other disciplines, or find lessons in
the past for developing countries. Rather, it is all of these plus one indispen-
sable ingredient. Economic historians study economies over the long term. I he
evolution of economies is their particular niche.
• / thcmk Dora Costa, Lance Dcwis, Stanley Engentmn, Ijiwrence Katz, Robert Margo,
Donald McCloskey, Joel Mokyr, Ijirry Neal, Dahlia Render. Kenneth Sokolojf, Robert
Wimples, Gavin Wright, and the editorial office of this journal for their suggestions.
References
Coatsworth, John H., Growlti Against Devel-
opnifni: The Economic Impact oj the Railrouds in
Porfirmn Mexico. DeKalb, 111.; Northern Illinois
University Press, 1981.
Conrad, Aifred H., and John R. Meyer,
"The Kconomics of Slavery in the Antebelliiin
South," journal oj FohUcal Economy. April 195H.
66.94-130.
Davis, Lance, ' 'And It Will Never Be Liter-
auite'; Ihe New Economic History; A Cri-
tique." Explorations in Economic History, Fall
1968, 6, 75-92.
* Davis, Lance E., and Douglass C. North,
institutional Change and American Economic
Growth. New York; (lainbridge University
Press, 1971.
Engerman, Stanley, L., "rhe Economic Im-
pacl of tlie Civil War," Explorations in Economic
Hkloiy, Spruig/Slimmer 19(i(). 3. 176-99.
Fishlow, Albert, .•\mencan Railroads and the
Transjorinaiurn oj ihe Atite-helliim Economy. Cam-
bridj^e. Mass.; Harvard University Press. 1965.
* Fogel, Robert W., Railroads aiitl Amrncan
Economu. Growth: Essays in Econometnc History.
'indicates a publication cited by the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences.

[[PAGE 18]]
208 Journal of Economic Perspectives
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press,
1964.
Fogel, Robert W., "Nutrition and the De-
cline in Mortality since 1700: Some Prelimi-
nary Findings." In Engerman, Stanley L., and
Robert L. (lallnuin, ed.s.. Long-Term Factors in
Amerucni Economic (irowth. Studies in hicnine and
Wealth. Vol. .'JI. Chicago: University of Chicago
Pre.ss, 1986, pp. 439-527.
* Fogel, Robert W., Without Consent or Con-
tract: The Hisf and Fall of American Stavery. New
York: W. W. Norton and Company, 1989.
*Fogel, Robert W., "Second lhougbls on
tbe European Escape from Hunger: Famines,
Chronic Malnutrition, and Mortality." In
Osinani, S. R., ed.. Ntdritwn and Poverty. Ox-
ford: Claienclon Press, 1992, pp. 243-86.
Fogei, Robert W., "Fxonomic Growth, Pop-
ulation Iheoiy, and Physiology: The Bearing
of Long-Ierm Processes on the Making of
Economic Policy." American Ecotiomic Reinew,
June HH)4, 84. :iti9-9:5.
Fogel, Robert W., et al., "Secular Changes
in American and Briiisb .Stature and Nutri-
tion," joiiriuil of hiterdisciplmary History, Au-
lumn 1983, 14, 44.5-81.
* Fogel, Robert W., and Stanley L. Enger-
man, 'I'lnw on the Croi.s: The Economics of Amen-
can S'egio Slavery. VoLs. 1 and 2. New York:
Liiile. Brown ;iri(l t^o.. 1974.
Fogel, Robert W., and Stanley L. Enger-
man, Explaining ilie Relative Efficiency of
.Slave Agriculture in ibe Antebellum Soutb,"
America)] F.conomic Review, June 1977, 67,
275-9fi.
Fogel, Robert W., and Stanley L. Enger-
man, Explaining tbe Relative Eflicicncy of
Slave Agriculture in tbe Antebellum Soutb:
Reply." American Economic Hevieio, September
1980. 7fV. 672-90.
Gallman, Robert, "SeiI-Sufficiency of ibe
(^oiion Economy of tbe Antebellum Soutb."
In Parker, William, ed.. The .Structure of the
Cotton Economy of the Atilebeltum South. Wash-
ington. D.C:.: Agricultural History Society,
1970. pp. .5-24.
Goodrich, Carter, (Government Promotion of
American Canals, and Railroads 1800-1890. New
York: C:olumbia University Press, i960.
Harley, C. Knick, "(Xean Freigbt Rates and
Productiviu, 1740-1913: Tbe Primacy of Me-
cbanica! Invention ReafTirmed," Journal of
Economic lliston. December 1988. 48. 851-76.
Hughes, Jonathan R. T., "Douglass Nortb
as a leatber." In Ransom, Roger L., Richard
Sutcb, and Gary M. Walt(m, eds., Exploration.'i
in the AVjc Economic History: Essays m Honor of
Douglci.v\ C. Morth. New York: Academic Press,
1982, pp. 3-11,
McCloskey, Donald N., "Docs (be Pasi Have
Useful Economics?," Journal of Economic Liter-
attire, ]\M\e 1976, 14. 434-61.
Murphy, Kevin M., Andrei Shleifer, and
Robert W. Vishny, "Industrialisation and the
Big Push." jounial of Potiiical Economy, Octo-
ber 1989. 97. 1003-26.
"Nortb, Douglass C, The Economic Cnnuth of
the United States, 1790-1860. New York: Pren-
tice Hall. 1961.
North, Douglass C, "Sources ul Produc-
tivity Change in Ocean Shipping, 1600-1850,"
Journal of Political Economy, September 1968.
76, 953-70.
Nortb, Douglass C, "Ibe New Economic
History After Twenty Years," Atnericaii Behav-
ioral Scientist. December 1977, 21, 187-200.
Nortb, Douglass C, Sirurtiire and Change
ni Economic History. New York: W. W. Norton
and Company. 1981.
* Nortb, Douglass C, tnstitutions, tnstitu-
tional Change and Economic Performutue. New
York: Cambridge University Press. 1990.
Nortb, Douglass C, and Lance E. Davis,
Institutional Change and American Economic
Growth. London: tlamhrjdge University Press,
1971.
* Nortb, Douglass C, and Robert Paul
Tbomas, The Rise n/ the We.^tern World: A New
Economic Hi.stoiy. London: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, 197.3.
Parker, William N., ed.. Trends in the Ameri-
can Economy in the Nineteenth Century, Studies in
Incotne and Wealth. Vol. 24. Conference on
Research in Income and Wealth. Princeton:
Princeton University Press, I960.
Romer, Christina, "The End of Economic
History." Journal oj Economic Education, Win-
ter 1994, 25. 49-66.
Rostow, W. W., The Stages of Economic
Growth: A \'on-Commiinist Matufesto. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Pre.ss. I960.
Temin, Peter, The Jacksoniari Economy. New
York: W. W. Norton and Company, 1969.
Thomas, Robert Paul, "A Quanlitative Ap-
proach lo the Study of the KfFects ul British
Imperial Policy on Colonial Welfare: Some
Preliminary Findings." journal of Economic
Histoiy. December 1965. 25, 615-38.
Whaples, Robert, "A Quantitative History
of the Journal oJ Economic Histoiy and the
Clionietric Revolution," Journal of Economic
Hislo>y,\\wc 1991. 5/, 289-301.
Wrigbt, Gavin, "1 he Efficiency of Slavery:
Another Interpretation." American Economic
Review, Marcb 1979, 69, 219-26.

[[PAGE 19]]
Copyright of Journal of Economic Perspectives is the property of American Economic Association
and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the
copyright holder's express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email
articles for individual use.
