Cliometrics after 40 years
PDF 쪽수 기준 · OCR

[[PAGE 1]]
Cliometrics After 40 Years
By AVNER GREIF*

[왼쪽 열]
Cliometrics emerged 40 years ago to com-
bine economic theory and quantitative analy-
sis for the advancement of history and
economics. As an intellectual movement, it as-
pired to enhance the study of past economies
by subjecting them to the rigor of economic
theory and quantitative analysis, while utiliz-
ing the richness of history to evaluate and
stimulate economic theory and to improve our
comprehension of long-run economic pro-
cesses. The contribution of this approach is
immeasurable: it has altered and enriched our
perceptions regarding numerous issues in eco-
nomic history while contributing a great deal
to economic theory and policy. But there has
been a cost: the prevailing economic theory
and the limitations of the computing power
and statistical techniques available to most
practitioners of this approach have also con-
strained the kind of economic history they
were able to write. In a process that began
about 15 years ago, however, these constraints
have been in the process of being relaxed, pre-
senting both promise and a challenge to
cliometrics.
That the constraint implied by computing
power and statistical techniques has been re-
laxed is clear. More powerful computers and
more sophisticated applications programs, for
example, have enabled more informative
quantitative analyses based on larger cross-
sectional studies, longer time series, or data
sets that could not have been assembled or an-
alyzed before. What is less apparent, however,
is the extent to which the economic-theory
constraint has been relaxed, This has occurred
not only because of improved theory, but also
because of a paradigm shift with significant
implications for cliometrics. What follows is a
short elaboration on the constraints imposed
* Department of Economics, Stanford University,
Stanford, CA 94305-6072. As always, I benefited from the
insightful comments of Joel Mokyr, Paul David, and
Gavin Wright.

[오른쪽 열]
by economic theory on cliometrics prior to this
shift, the nature of the shift, and its implica-
tions for economic history.
The main theoretical framework utilized by
cliometricians since the early days of the clio-
metrics revolution has been neoclassical eco-
nomics as it was formulated just prior to that
revolution. This theoretical framework shifted
the focus of economic-history analysis toward
historical episodes and topics in which mar-
kets were arguably important. Furthermore,
much research was aimed at demonstrating the
operation of markets in past economies. Com-
paring papers published in the Journal of Eco-
nomic History from 1951 to 1960 (just prior
to the cliometrics revolution), with those
published, for example, from 1971 to 1980,
indicates that economic historians devoted
much less research to the role of government
in the economy, entrepreneurship, or business
organization (Robert Whaples, 1991 tables 1,
2). While the contributions of historical anal-
ysis based on neoclassical economics (sur-
veyed, for example, in Donald N. McCloskey
[1976]) are beyond doubt, the reliance on ne0-
classical economics also severely constrained
economic-history analysis by limiting the is-
sues that could have been examined.
The neoclassical economics adopted by
cliometricians limits economic-history analy-
sis since it is an ahistorical approach that de-
ductively assumes that the same preferences,
technology, and endowment lead to a unique
economic outcome in all historical episodes.
Its ahistorical nature reflects theoretical as-
sumptions rather than empirical observations
regarding the relevance of these assumptions
or conclusions. Exogenous preferences, tech-
nology, and endowment as well as the lack of
complementarities over time, preferences, or
technologies are among the assumptions im-
plying that there is no need to examine an
tory of change and capacity to change are con-
strained by its own history. Convexity of all
production sets, nonstrategic interactions, and
400

Copyright @ 2001 All Rights Reserved

[[PAGE 2]]
[왼쪽 열]
CLIOMETRICS AFTER 40 YEARS
v87NO2
the noninterdependence of agents' tastes guar-
antee uniqueness and imply that history does
net impact equilibrium selection and that in-
stitutions other than the market are not re-
quired for coordination and enforcement. Low
tr: insaction and enforcement costs and com-
plete and symmetric information guarantee the
crthogonality of efficiency and distribution,
th as rendering wealth distribution and non-
n'arket political, economic, or social institu-
tions irrelevant for positive analysis. The
assumption that secure property rights and
lirge numbers are necessary and sufficient
canditions for the emergence of markets and
that markets always efficiently provide incen-
ties and coordination renders irrelevant the
analysis of market formation and the nonmar-
ket institutions that support, complement, and
supplement the market. The (de facto) as-
slimption that preferences are exogenous to the
economic system and have a particular form
and domain renders obsolete the study of the
Frocesses through which preferences are
formed and social norms interrelated with eco-
r omic motivation to generate patterns of
bu:havior.
Hence, these assumptions limited the study
ci issues that were traditionally the focus of
economic historians, such as the nature and
role of nonmarket institutions, culture, entre-
Ireneurship, technological and organizational
innovation, politics, social factors, distrihu-
tional conflicts, and the historical process
through which economies grew and declined.
T'he importance of examining such issues and
the cost of neglecting them, however, became
vious, for example, when cliometrics as it
was being practiced was unable to provide
rrany, if any, insights into the process of mar-
k t:t emergence for economies in transition
away from communism. The mixed blessing
inherent in the reliance on a particular theory
w ith limiting assumptions has been recognized
by economic historians as early as the 1970's.
In their presidential addresses to the Economic
History Association, William N. Parker (1971
I* 6) noted that in good part "the new eco-
nomic history' has proved that the market
has really worked very well.'' while Douglass
(: North (1974 p. 1 ) noted that **it is the sys-
tematic use of standard neoclassical economic
theory which both has provided the incisive

[오른쪽 열]
401
new insights into man's economic past and
also serves to limit the range of enquiry.*' In
response, many economic historians who at-
tempted to examine issues that did not fit well
into the neoclassical paradigm had to conduct
their research outside the framework provided
by tconomic theory. Others responded by in-
geniously extending neoclassical theory to ex-
amine such diverse issues as institutional
changes and technological development as
though markets determine the outcomes.
The above is not a criticism of the useful-
ness of neoclassical theory for economic-
history analysis. It is a criticism of the use of
a sing le hody of theory to direct all economic-
history analyses for all issues in all past and
present economies. Not only does it diminish
the range of issues that can be examined, but
it also limits the contribution of economic his-
tory to economics. As noted by Robert Solow
(1987 pp. 25--26), it is the attempt to use a
'single universally valid model of the world''
that causes economic history to give "back to
the theorist the same routine gruel that the eco-
nomic theorist gives to the historian."' At the
same time, it was the theorists' attempt to pro-
vide ia model linking economic fundamentals
to economic outcomes in all times and places
that provided cliometricians with a limited
menu of theories to choose from and provided
disincentives to conducting economic history
analy sis outside that particular theoretical
framework.
The heyday of neoclassical economics
within cliometrics, however, was also a pe-
riod during which economic theory was rad-
ically changing. Theoretical developments
and empirical evidence led both micro- and
macroeconomic theory to recognize the futil-
ity of seeking a single universally applicable
economic model. Microeconomics (influ-
enced by game theory and the economics of
inforination) recognized that economic out-
comes are very sensitive to the details of the
situation while, even in a given situation,
multiple equilibria may exist. Similarly, mac-
roeconomics recognized that neither the neo-
classical Solow growth model nor any
particular representative-agent, rational-
choice model can capture the idiosyncratic
economic, political, and social complexities
of tach process of economic development

[[PAGE 3]]
[왼쪽 열]
402
AEAPAPERSANDPROCEEDINGS
and transition. The result was a proliferation
in the numbers and types of micro- and mac-
roeconomic models, each aimed at highlight-
ing particular, potentially important aspects
of economic systems.
These changes in economic theory have had
profound implications for cliometrics. First,
the resulting increase in the menu of economic
models is relaxing the constraint on economic-
history analysis. Second, and more impor-
tantly. these changes in economic theory have
narrowed the conceptual gap between eco-
nomics and economic history. In particular,
economics is moving closer to economic his-
tory in becoming more inductive, rather then
deductive, and accepting induction as an im-
portant route to general economic proposi-
tions. With respect to each particular situation,
the methodological approach, the theoretical
framework, and the modeling details are to be
determined and substantiated by examining
the situation under consideration, and no par-
times and places. Thus, no longer is the clio-
metrician restricted to cast his or her analysis
within the constraints imposed by existing the-
ories, while the use of context-specific models
adapted to capture the features of the historical
situation of interest has the promise of enrich-
ing economic theory.
Last, but not least, this new economic
theory and the technical tools it relies upon
underscore the importance of history in eco-
nomic processes. Microeconomics theory,
endogenous-growth models, and dynamic
general-equilibrium models recognize the im-
portance of historically determined factors,
such as posteriors, focal points, learning, co-
ordination, sunk investment, historically de-
termined interest groups, social groups, social
norms, legislation, and preferences. Hence,
economic theory has begun to support, rather
than undermine, the claim regarding the im-
portance of history and to provide conceptual
frameworks within which path-dependence
may be examined.
These changes in economic theory have al-
ready began to influence research in economic
history. It is not a coincidence that the per-
centage of pages in the Journat of Economic
History devoted to industrial organization and
labor substantially increased in the 1980's

[오른쪽 열]
L661 AVW
(Whaples, 1991 table 1), as these fields were
the first to be transformed by the changing
nature of microeconomic theory. By now,
changes in theory have influenced various
other lines of inquiry within economic history,
such as those concerning endogenous growth,
path-dependence, and institutions (for discus-
sion and surveys, see Paul A. David [1994],
N. F. R. Crafts [19971, and Greif [1997a, b]].
At the same time, the changing nature of
cliometrics comes with a price and presents
new challenges. The proliferation of theoreti-
cal frameworks is causing cliometrics to lose
some of its coherence and unity. Thus it faces
the challenge of maintaining the intensity of
the discourse that has contributed so much to
its achievements. Furthermore, the flexibility
of the new theoretical frameworks implies that
in many cases more than one model can be
utilized to analyze or rationalize a particular
historical phenomenon. Hence, cliometrics
faces the challenge of devising a methodology
that will enable it to retain its emphasis on
combining theory with empirical and historical
studies to reveal and learn from what actually
transpired in the past. To a large extent, clio-
metrics still faces the challenge of developing
a methodology that will enable it to benefit
from the new theoretical richness without sac-
rificing its traditional empirical orientation.
REFERENCES
Crafts, N. F. R. "Endogenous Growth: Lessons
for and from Economic History,** in David
M. Kreps and Kenneth F. Wallis, eds., Ad-
vances in economic theory, Vol. 2. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997,
pp. 38--78.
David, Paul A. ""Why Are Institutions the 'Car-
riers of History'?: Path-Dependence and the
Evolution of Conventions, Organizations
and Institutions.'* Structural Change and
Economic Dynamics, December 1994,
5(2), pp. 205-20.
Greif, Avner. “'Economic History and Game
Theory,'' in Robert J. Aumann and Sergiu
Hart, eds., Handbook of game theory, Vol.
3. Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1997a
(forthcoming ) .
""Micro-theory and Recent Develop-
ments in the Study of Economic Institutions

Copyright @ 2001 All Rights Reserved

[[PAGE 4]]
[왼쪽 열]
VOL. 87 NO 2
CLIOMETRICSAFTER 4OYEARS
Through Economic History,'' in David M.
Kreps and Kenneth F. Wallis, eds., Ad-
vances in economic theory, Vol. 2. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997b.
pp. 79-- 113.
MeCloskey, Donald N. *'Does the Past Have
Useful Economics?', Journal of Eco.
nomic Literature, June 1976, 14( 2), pp.
434-61.
North, Douglass C. ""Beyond the New Eco-
nomic History.'' Journal of Economic His-
tory, March 1974, 34(1), pp. 1 --7.

[오른쪽 열]
403
Parker, William N. ""From Old to New to Old in
Economic History.' Journal of Economic
History, March 1971, 31(1), pp. 3 --14.
Solow, R. E. “"Economics: Is Something Miss-
ing""* in William N. Parker, ed., Economic
history and the modern economist. Oxford:
Basil Blackwell, 1987, pp. 21 -29.
Whaples, Robert. 'A Quantitative History of
the Journal of Economic History and the
Cliometric Revolution."' Journal of Eco-
nomic History, June 1991, 51(2), pp. 289-
301.

[[PAGE 5]]
Copyright of American Economic Review is the property of American Economic Association and its content

[왼쪽 열]
may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express
written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.
