Does the Past Have Useful Economics
PDF 쪽수 기준 · OCR

[[PAGE 1]]
Does"the. Past Have Useful
Economics?
By DONALD N. MCCLOSKEY
University of Chicago
It is not mere convention that impels me to thank the many icol-
leagues who have commented on earlier drafts of this essay. I have
received from them in writing the equivalent of over 100 typed
pages, and many hours of conversation as well. This itself measures
the vigor of historical economics, one theme here, but their contribu-
tion to the product is immeasurable. I would like to thank, therefore,
the seminars in economic history at Chicago and at Northwestern;
and R. Cameron, M. Edelstein, S. L. Engerman, R. W. Fogel,
R. Gallman, H. Gemery, C. D. Goldin, G. Gunderson, G. Hawke,
R. Higgs, G. Hueckel, J. R. T. Hughes, H. G. Johnson, E. L. Jones,
A. Kahan, C. P. Kindleberger, A. Leijonhufvud, P. Lindert, P.
McClelland, M. Mclnnis, J. Mokyr, L. D. Neal, A. Olmstead, D. Per-
kins, J. D. Reid, N. Rosenberg, W. W. Rostow, A. J. Schwartz, B. Solow,
G. Walton, D. Whitehead, and J. G. Williamson. And I would like
to apologize to George Stigler for inverting for my own purposes the
title of his fine essay, "Does Economics Have a Useful Past?" [107,
1969], and for ignoring the useful lemma illustrated there (p. 226):
"there are not ten good reasons for anything."

[왼쪽 열]
HE ANsWER, of course, is "yes," and at
one time the very question would
have seemed impertinent. Smith, Marx,
Mill, Marshall, Keynes, Heckscher,
Schumpeter, and Viner, to name a few,
were nourished by historical study and
nourished it in turn. Gazing down from
Valhalla it would seem to them bizarre
that their heirs would study economics
with the history left out, stopping their
desultory search for facts in time series at
the last 25 years and in cross sections at the
latest tape from the Bureau of the Census,
passing by the experiments of history with
little regard for their place in a nonexperi-
mental science, distrusting old facts as er-

[오른쪽 열]
ror-ridden intrusions from another struc-
ture, abandoning historical perspectives
on their political economy, and basing
their theory and policy on stylized non-
facts about economic development, fairy
tales remembered from their youth.
Yet this is what has happened. It began
in the 1940's, in some respects earlier, as
young American economists bemused by
revolutions in the substance and method
of economics neglected the reading of
history in favor of macroeconomics, math-
ematics, and statistics. The low oppor-
tunity cost of such specialization rein-
forced it: American economic history by
that time was, albeit with a few brilliant
434

Copyright @ 2001. All Rights Reserved.

[[PAGE 2]]
McCloskey: On Economic History

[왼쪽 열]
exceptions, neither good economics nor ':. leagues in econiomics, yet their colleagues
good history, a dim echo of the American
institutionalists and through' them of the
German historical school. It is not surpris-
ing that immature scholars undervalued
history then, still less surprising in a
decade in which economists were having
difficulty understanding macroeconomic
policy even in the short run, mathematical
maximization even under narrow con-
straints, and statistical inference even
with a simple structure. What is more sur-
prising is that the' reading and using of
history was not taken up again in the early
1950's, as economists :rediscovered eco-
nomic growth, surprise which turns to as-
tonishment when the neglect of history
persisted into the 1970's, as they rediscov-
ered property rights, inheritance, educa-
tional investment, social class, income dis-
tribution, and other pieces of. history in
economics. And what is most astonishing
in this--what must make Schumpeter, say,
turn back in disgust to his horn of mead
and his dialogue with Marx and Smith on
the historical dynamics of capitalism--is
that in the late 1950's a throng of historical
economists equipped . with Lagrangean
multipliers and Durbin-Watson statistics
poured out of Purdue, Harvard, Washing-
ton, Columbia, Johns Hopkins, and a wid-
ening array of new factories at home and
abroad to reshape econonic history into
a form suited to the tastes of their: col-
1 This difference, treating each of the ffty years as
an observation, is significant at the .00003 level. Be-
cause the distribution for the earlier period was bi-
modal, and plainly therefore non-normal, I used the
Mann-Whitney U test. The underlying evidence is
available on request. Briefly, for 1925-1963 the num-
ber of pages in articles on history in the three jour-
nals was calculated from all their appearances in the
various history classifications in the Index of Eco-
nomic Journals [1, 1961-1965]. Its definition of "his-
20 years or more earlier than the beginning date of
the volume" [l, 196l, p. xi]. The definition imparts
a downward bias to the number of pages recorded
as history in earlier years, because the volumes of the
Index for those years cover a wider span: to qualify
as history an article in 1939 had to concern events
34 years before; one in 1949, 29 years before; one in

[오른쪽 열]
435
did not buy. The identification problem is
solved: it was the demand curve, not the
supply curve, that moved back. At the
same price measured in an hour of reading
or a month of writing, economists nowa-
days demand less economic history..
The result is apparent in those periodi-
cal declarations of "what it is 'that real
economists do, the general interest jour-
nals of the profession. From 1925 to 1944
the pages of the American Economic Re-
view, the Quarterly Journal of Economics,
and - the. Journal of. Political Economy
taken together contained 6.5 percent (as
weighted by size) of.articles.on economic
history; from 1945 :to 1974 they contained
3.3 percent (similarly weighted).1 For the
three journals -taken separately the drift
away from history was as shown in TABLE
I, and more detailed statistics tell a similar
story. The JPE was for a long time the most
historical of the journals, refecting per-
haps the reluctance with which Chicago
embraced the view that economics is ap-
plied mathematics and statistics and that
in the longrun we are all dead. From 1929
to 1944, with a'remarkable devotion to
intellectuality in the face of world depres-
sion and war, the JPE devoted ll percent
of its pages to economic history, many of
them the products of Earl Hamilton and
John Nef. By 1970-74, however, the heirs
of Jacob Viner: and Paul Douglas devoted
2.8 percent of the pages of their journal to
1963, 23 years; and one in 1974, only 20. A correction
would accentuate the postwar fall. For 1964-74 the
number of pages in articles on history was calculated
from the journals thermselves, classifying doubtful
cases as history. The total number of pages available
for all subjects was calculated from the journals, in-
cluding supplements sent to subscribers and excilud-
ing advertisements, administrative matter, and book
reviews in book review sections (not classified in the
Index). The AER after 1969 is not defined to include
this Journal; if .one were to adopt the alternative
definition, the recent evaporation of history from the
journals would be somewhat more pronounced. The
pages, weighting journals in the total by their num-
ber of total pages. Unweighted averages of the three
behave in much the same way..

Copyright @ 2001. All Rights Reserved.

[[PAGE 3]]
Journal of Economic Literature

[왼쪽 열]
436
SUMMARY OF THE PERCENT OF PAGES DEVOTED TO ECONOMIC HISTORY, 1925-1974
1925-44
1945-74 :
Level at .which the. differences
are significant (Mann-Whitney
test) :
it. They were merely joining the trend.
The journals of.1935-39,when economists
were obsessed. (properly) with last year's
unemployment and :trade statistics, icon-
tained : proportionately 2.7: times more
economic history' than the journals of
1970-74, . when economists were instead
obsessed (again properly) with the origins
in:the very long run of growth, discrimina-
tion, legal change, and the historic :evils of
capitalism:: :
: These 'contrasts : will: surprise no :one
familiar with the literature of economics
over the last fifty years, confirmed as they
are in other ways:2 'To be sure, specialized
journals of economic history drew off his-
torical articles from the three major jour-
nals, as did specialized' journals in 'other
fields.: The 'composition : of the general
journals is nonetheless a measure of what
those :who write for, .edit, and referee
them believe. is: of general interest 'to
economists. They believe history to be of
small 'and diminishing interest. That the
general journals have little economic his-
;  Martin Bronfenbrenner.. would .not 'agree [?,
1966]. He.measured. the column inches of Class 5
(Economic History) relative to the total in the Index
volumes, arriving at:
1886-1924
1.21%
:1950-54 -.
1.44%
1925-39
: 1.49
: 1955-59 :
: 1.64
1940-49.
1.49
.1960-63
:+1.47.
This he described as an "upturn . : .with some slight
decline since 1960" [7, 1966, p. 544]. In this calcula-
tion, however;:he neglects the articles classified'as
History but appearing in other parts of: the index
(such as'9.51, Security and Money Markets, History),
which are,ignoring the double-counting, 80 percent
of the total; and he does not notice the shiarp down-
ward bias in the earlier yolumes imparted by the

[오른쪽 열]
TABLE I
AER
QIE
JPE
4.4
5.4
9.9
2.2
3.3
5.4
.011
.021
.020.
tory in view of the existence of specialized
journals in' economic history read exclu-
sively by' economic. historians does not
contradict. the. observation . that econo-
mists are increasingly 'ahistorical: It 're-
states it. Indeed, even if one were to'sup-
pose that economists read at random in all
the 200-odd journals indexed in this Jour-
nal, the probability of them stumbling on
an article'on economic history in 1973-74
would have been .028, and the number of
encounters with history in the journals,
like the number of deaths from horse-
kicks in the cavalry, would approximate'a
Poisson distribution.3: Of 'course, econo.
mists in other fields do not in fact consult
specialized journals of economic history.
The drift of economic history into special-
ized journals and of economists 'out 'of
reading these . journals is doubtless at-
tributable to the widening gap in method;
closing .only comparatively recently; be-
tween'economics and history. In 1926 the
editors of the JPE believed, no doubt cor-
rectly,; that their subscribers would read
B. J: Hovde, "French Socialisim and the
definition.of "history" in the index (an article appear-
ing 1924 would have to'be concerned. chiefly with
events before : 1866, 58 years before, : to qualify as
history). A. W. Coats' assertion that econonic history
has occupied *an increasing share of the total peri-
odical literature" [12, 1971, p: 32] is based on Bron-
fenbrenner's figures::
3 The figure is the share of column inches of history
titles in the index of the Journat. In 1973-74 these
included all articles in history, not:mierely those fit-
ting into Class 5 of the Indexr. Highly specialized jour-
nals .of.. economic  history, such as-- Agricultural
History, are not indexed in the Journal, they were
in the Index.:

Copyright @ 2001. All Rights Reserved.

[[PAGE 4]]
McCloskey: On Economic History

[왼쪽 열]
Triple Entente, 1893-1914,":the : first of
three long articles :cast in narrative. What
is most significant,though, and least quan-
tifiable, is -the drift in economics away
from using history, as distinct from merely
reading it. Whether or not an economist
specialized in, . say, international : trade
reads for hirnself a. seminal article on dis-
tributed lags in Econometrica or on'port-
folio analysis in the Journal of Finance, he
will use . their results, .distilled :in survey
articles and in textbooks. The same cannot
be said at present for economic history.
Does the past have useful economics? The
average American: economist : nowadays
answers, "No.".
The exceptions are notable, in:.mare
ways than one. It will come as a surprise
to many economists that among others Ar-
men. Alchian, E, Cary. Brown. Richard
Caves, Donald Gordon, Reuben Kessel.
Marc Nerlove, Mancur Olson, Albert Rees,
Stanley Reiter, and Arnold Zellner, none
of whom do their main work in history.
have in fact made contributions ,to, it.
Turning away for a moment from the sub-
ject here, American economics and its re-
lations with American history, it inight be
noted that in Britain such traditions of a
serious amateur interest in economic his-
tory are strong: Mark Blaug, A. K. Cairn-
cross, J. R. Hicks, R. C. O. Matthews, E. H.
Phelps-Brown, ,R.. , S. . Sayers,Brinley
Thomas, and John Vaizey, for example,
are well-known in Britain as economists
dealing with contemporary problems of
policy and theory, yet all of them have
contributed to British economic history at
a high level., The postwar officers of the
American Economic Association, mem-
bers of the older generation trained' to
place history as Schumpeter did with the-
ory and statistics at the foundation of eco-
+ [60, Kessel and Alchiari, 1959; 8, Brown, 1956; 10,
Caves, 1971; 11, Chambers and Gordon, 1966; 77,
Nerlove, 1965; 81, Olson, 1963; 90, Rees, 196l; 54,
Hughes and Reiter, 1958; 137, Zellner and Murphy,
1959.1 It was Reiter who invented the word "clio.
metrics," a joke that caught on.

[오른쪽 열]
437
nomic science; can provide a comparable
list. Among:recent vice-presidents, Moses
Abramovitz, Evsey -Domar, Charles :Kin-
dleberger, W: Arthur Lewis, 'and Robert
Triffin show nio signs of. forsaking history.
Nor :do the words and works of postwar
presidents reflect the dominant opinion of
their constituenits that economic history is
a frill, useless to the hard, important busi-
ness' of :formalizing another "economic
idea; of refining the techniques for exploit.
ing'a given set of statistics, or of deflecting
current policy from a third into a. second
best configuration: In .his presidential ad:
dress to the :Association in :1970, Wassily
Leontief scolded those 'who had elected
him for ignoring empirical work in favor
of : ever more : mechanical : theory.: and
scholastic econometrics [66, 1971, p::3]::
Devising a new statistical procedure, however
tenuous, that makes it possible to squeeze out
one more unknown parameter from a given set'
of data, is judged' a greater scientific achieve-..
: ..ment than the successful search for additional :
-information that would permit us to measure i:
the magnitude of the same. parameter in a less..
ingenious, but more reliable way.
He applauded agricultural economists for
a long tradition .in another: istyle,", and
might: as .well have -applauded historical
economists for a younger tradition in the
same style i[66, 1971..p. 5]: ..
'An exceptional. example of a healthy balance
between theoretical and empirical analysis and
.: of the readiness of professional economists to
cooperate' with experts in'the neighboring dis- '
: ciplines is offered by Agricultural Economics as.
.it developed in this country over the last fty.
: :years.
One of the agricultural economists whom
Leontief undoubtedly had in mind, Theo-
dore W. Schultz, himself a past president
of the Association, regretted in 1974 that
he himself had not studied economic his-
tory more diligently in his youth and :ar-
gued 'that "there is a strong tendency on
the part of virtually all economists to 'un-
dervalue. the history :of the economy. of

Copyright @ 2001. All Rights Reserved.

[[PAGE 5]]
Journal of Economic Literature

[왼쪽 열]
438
both high:.and low income countries. I
doubt the:wisdom of this tendency to con-
centrate on the immediate present" [10l,
1974, p.12]. Another postwar president,
Milton Friedman, in collaboration with
Anna J. Schwartz, carried a high valuation
of economic history to the point of making
a seminal contribution to it, as in 'a less
extended way did Paul Douglas, John
Kenneth Galbraith, Robert Aaron Gor-
don, and J. H. Williams. And still others,
such as Schumpeter, Harold Innis, and Si-
mon Kuznets, valued economic history to
the point of devoting sustained effort over
long careers to its enrichment.
It is apparent, however, that this older
generation .of American economists did
not persuade many of the. younger that
history is . essential to economics. Those
they did persuade-the "new"' economic
historians, or "cliometricians"--ignored
the task of persuading their.doubting col-
leagues and directed their rhetorical ener-
gies: instead  towards non-economists,
chiefly historians: This choice of audience
had 'the advantage of imparting emotional
cohesion to the cliometricians, filling them
with the enthusiasm. and'energy of con-
vinced imperialists. The result was a series
of conquests beginning, as I have said, in
the late 1950's and widening further with
each year that 'sharply revised American
economic history and has begun recently
to revise other econornic histories as well.
Being intellectual imperialists, however,
the cliometricians forgot, as many imperi-
alists do, that foreign adventures require
domestic support, and by neglecting to so-
licit it, they lost it. Were other economists
so disregarding of their self-interests they
would court a similar fateP For thirty years
after . the first stirrings. in the .1930's,
mathematical : and 'statistical :economists
pointed out to everyone who would listen
that:one or another piece of economics is
essentially mathematical or essentially sta-
tistical until at last no one-remained to be
convinced. . Historical economists could

[오른쪽 열]
have pointed out with equal force that one
or another piece, in'some cases the same
piece claimed by their. more aggressive
colleagues, is essentially historical:. But
they seldom did.. Socialized inside eco-
nomics as it developed after the War, they
were apologetic and deferential towards
their colleagues, to the point at times of
imitating their colleagues' low standards
of. factual accuracy and wider social rele-
vance along with their high standards of
logical cogency and statistical grace. Lack-
ing the self-confidence of the mathemati-
cal or statistical economists, the new his-
torical economists have neglected the task
of persuading others of the worth of his-
tory in economics.
.. I. The Value of Economic History
: It is not because it is difficult to do that
the task has beeri neglected. The lines of
argument are opened with little' effort.
For the professional economic historian
the worth of economic history is that of
general history, to which it contributes,
and it is because he puts a high value on
history, economic or not, that he chooses
to study it. This justification. suffices for
him and for any economist who believes
that history, whether or not it is directly
useful in testing economic laws or framing
economic policy, is' collective memory
fruitful of wisdom. At the least pragmatic
level; indeed, the worth of economic his-
tory is that of intellectual activity gener-
ally, and nothing 'should be, easier than
convincing professional intellectuals that
such activity is worthwhile..G. M. Trevel-
yan put the point gracefully [117, 1942,
pp. vii, x]:
Disinterested intellectual curiosity is the life-"
blood of real civilization. . . ..There is nothing ::
that more divides civilised from semi-savage
man than to be conscious of our forefathers as
they really were, and bit by bit to reconstruct
: the mosaic of.the long-forgotten past. To weigh :
: the stars, or to make ships sail in the air or
below the sea, is not :a more astonishing and .

Copyright @ 2001. All Rights Reserved.

[[PAGE 6]]
McCloskey: On Economic History

[왼쪽 열]
1.1
ennobling performance on the part of the hu-:
man race in these latter days, than to know the
course of events that had long been forgotten,
and the true nature of men' and women'who
were here before us.
One can admire historically important
and economically perceptive histories of
Southern slaves, nineteenth-century busi-
nessmen, 'or medieval peasants. in. the
same way that one admires a mathemati-
cally beautiful and elegantly proven theo-
rem in the theory of. : optimal .control,
whether or not the histories or the theo-
rem have any practical use.
In this respect, indeed, by their attach-
ment to the ivory tower, historical econo-
mists have much in common with math-
ematical economists. Further, 'though in
their fascination with.markets both activi-
ties are recognizably econornic, both prac-
titioners are likely to be met with a glassy
stare and a change of 'subject when they
speak of probate records or fixed point
theorems to their colleagues in the coffee
room. There remains, to be sure, one con-
spicuous point of asymmetry: forty years
of'investment in mathematizing econom-
ics and of disinvestment in historicizing
economics has made it less : acceptable
among economists to admit ignorance of
mathematics than to admit ignorance of
history. The days are passing when the so-
cial sciences bridged the two cultures,
literary .and scientific, and economics
burned the bridge long ago. Comfortable
ignorance, to be sure, is not a monopoly
of economists. A culture is a 'definition of
barbarians, a definition of which people
one may safely ignore; an intellectual cul-
ture is a definition of which classes of
knowledge one may safely ignore. A social
historian dealing habitually with inher-
ently quantitative issues would be deeply
ashamed to admit that he is ignorant of the
languages, literature, or political history of
the societies he studies; yet admits cheer-
fully, with no apparent resolve to amend
his ignorance, that his mathenatical and

[오른쪽 열]
439
statistical sophistication is that 'of a ten
year old child. It is meritorious in such
circles to be innocent of numbers, as to be
free from some mental defect. Economists
have not usually carried the parallel atti-
tude so far. It is true, nonetheless, that an
applied economist dealing habitually with
inherently historical issues: would . be
ashamed to admit that he is ignorant of
differential equations or identifiability, yet
admits with no sense of loss that he is.en-
tirely ignorant of. what occured in the
economy he studies before 1929 or 1948
or 1970.
What, then, do economists lose by their
increasing inclination to define their intel-
lectual culture to involve ignorance of the
past? Why, even if they choose not to heed
the lofty :call of disinterested intellectual
curiosity, should - economists ': read : and
write economic history?
II. The Pragmatic Value of Economic
History
A. 'More Economic Facts'
The pragmatic answers are'straightfor.
ward, the first and most obvious being that
history provides the economist with more
information with which to put his proposi-
tions in jeopardy: The volume of informa-
tion available will come as a surprise to
most economists, consumers as they are.
The National Bureau of Economic Re-
search is unusual in this, and its half-cen-
tury of tillage of the past, harvested as data
in thousands of regressions by economists
otherwise uninterested in history; amply
nourished the new historical economists of
the last fifteen years. During the 1950's
and 1960's many of them served an ap-
prenticeship in economic observation, to
change the metaphor, at the Bureau's so-
cial observatory in New York, contribut-
ing heavily to the two catalogues of histori-
cal objects. produced in the late 1950's
and the early 1960's (edited by W. N. Par-

Copyright @ 2001. All Rights Reserved.

[[PAGE 7]]
Journal of Economic Literature

[왼쪽 열]
440
ker [82, 1960] and D. S. Brady [6, 1966])'
The publication in'1960' of another
work in which the historians at the NBER
had a hand, together with the Bureau
of the 'Census and the Social Science. Re-
search Council [118, 1960], can mark the
beginning of. the Keplerian stage'of the
new. economic history. The National Bu-
reau's interests. were 'more nomothetic
than historical---an interest in quantitative
history for the light it: could cast .on
regularities and (eventually) predictabili-
ties of the economic system rather than for
the light it could cast on history itself--but
it would be churlish as well as inaccurate
to discount for that reason the role Moses
Abramovitz, Arthur Burns, Solomon Fab-
ricant, Raymond : Goldsmith, and' John
Kendrick among many others 'played in
encouraging historical economics. In a dis-
cipline increasingly bored by history the
Bureau was from the beginning, as Wesley
Clair Mitchell put it in 1927, committed
to the notion that [74, 1927, p. x]:
Business cycles consist of exceedingly complex
interactions among a considerable number of
economic processes, that to gain insight into
the interactions one must combine historical
studies with quantitative and qualitative anal.
ysis, that the phenomena are peculiar to a cer-
tain form of economic'organization; and that :
understanding of this scheme of institutions is
. prerequisite to an understanding of. cyclical
fuctuations.
Thirty-six years later the'commitment to
history lived on in the armbition of Milton
Friedman and Anna J:.Schwartz to write
an "analytical narrative" as "a prologue
and background for a statistical analysis of
the secular and cyclical behavior of money
:" The earier volume contains most of the papers
delivered'to the joint meeting of the Conference on
Income and Wealth'and'the Arnerican Economic
History Association'at Williamstown in 1957, a meet-
ing that celebrated the marriage between the NBER
and the new economic history. Recently, it is sad to
report, the marriage has been drifting towards sepa.
ration."

[오른쪽 열]
in the United States" [33, 1963, pp. xxi-
xxii]..
This governing idea of the Bureau--that
one could in empirical work go beyond
consuming historical facts to producing
them, embedding the output in its'appro-
priate historical. milieu-was 'seized . on
and. expanded by the. young' historical
economists of the 1950's'and 1960's. It oc-
curred'to"them that the statistics most
economists are content to receive from
clean-looking columns of reference books
could in fact be constructed for much'ear-
lier times than had-been thought possible
and could be brought to bear after their
construction' on important historical is-
sues. Brimming from their other courses
in graduate school with the new math-
ematical, 'statistical, : and computational
technigues that: fowed into the cur-
riculun in the 1950's, they had the tools
with which to reshape the historical ob-
ject.. To use symbolically the names of
three men whose influence was more than
symbolic, the students of Alexander Ger-
schenkron, Simon Kuznets, and Douglass
North were quick learners and saw that if
the masters 'could pushi 'measures of
American income or Italian industrial out-
put or the American balance of payments
back to 1869 or 1881 or 1790, they could
too, and more. Robert Gallman; a student
of Kuznets, laboriously reconstructed frst
American commodity output then GNP
back to the 1830's [34, 1960; 35, 1966]; he
later joined with William Parker, a student
of A: P. Usher at Harvard and of Ger-
schenkron, Usher's successor, in 'a large-
scale sampling of the hand-written manu-
scripts .of the 1860 agricultural census.
Richard Easterlin, another student of Kuz-
nets, reconstructed income by state back
to 1840, then turned, by .way.of the long
swing, to the analysis of American popula-
tion back to the middle of the nineteenth
century [21, 1960; 22, 1961; 23, 1968]. Al-
fred Conrad, Paul David, :Albert Fishlow,
John · Meyer, Goran . Ohlin, Henry: Ro-

Copyright @ 2001. All Rights Reserved.

[[PAGE 8]]
McCloskey: On Economic : History

[왼쪽 열]
sovsky, and Peter Temin, .all students of
Gerschenkron, made Harvard for a time
in the late 1950's and early 1960's a center
of research in the ,new economic history
by exploring with economists' eyes -the
voluminous quantitative records, hitherto
neglected, of slavery, agricultural machin-
ery, railways, schooling, and iron and steel
in nineteenth-century -America, agricul-
ture and governmental finance in nine-
teenth-century Japan, and population in
medieval Europe.". At about the. same
time, another . example of simultaneous
discovery so common when an idea's time
has cone, similar centers had sprung up
at Rochester (where two students of Kuz-
nets, Robert Fogel and Stanley Engerman,
were exploring the records of American
railways, slavery, and agriculture in the
nineteenth century) and at Purdue (where
Jonathan Hughes and. Lance Davis, stu-
dents of. North, together with Edward
Ames, Nathan. Rosenberg, and .a start-
lingly large nunber of. other economists
were reinterpreting the record of finance,
business cycles, and :technological change
from : the : twentieth century. to. the four-
teenth).7 From 1960 .on, these groups
gathered annually at a conference at Pur-
due, transferred to Wisconsin after 1969.8
Elsewhere Gary Walton [12l, 1967] and
other students of North joined with North
himself in.a reconstruction of ocean ship-
ping rates back to the seventeenth cen-
The monument to this work is Part One of Ro-
sovsky, ed. .[96, 1966]. Conrad and Meyer's work is
collected in [14, 1964].
7 The products of the Purdue school (foriit 1958-
1966) are gathered in Purdue Faculty Papers in Eco-
nomic History [88, 1967].
- The role of foundation financing for this and
other projects in cliometrics was critical. The Ford
Foundation supported the Purdue meetings for a
tirne, and the Rockefeller Foundation supported a
generation of Gerschenkron's students at Harvard.
A brief gap in the middle 1960's was filled after 1968
by the National Science Foundation, which has con-
tinued since then to encourage cliometrics, When
some future historian of economic thought applies
refined measures to this history, he will find, I think,
that the intellectual marginal product of these grants
was extraordinarily high.

[오른쪽 열]
441
tury [78, 1968];: Matthew. .Simon, also
working with the fact-makers at Columbia
and. the. NBER in -the -1950's, developed
balance of payments accounts for 1861-
1900 [104, 1960]. Stanley Lebergott exam:
ined anew the record of American labor
back to 1800 [65, 1964]:- Gary Walton in
collaboration with James Shepherd .[102,
1972]; : another .student: of North, con-
structed trade accounts for the American
colonies, and still another student of
North, and of R. P. Thomas, Terry Ander-
son.[2, 1972], : constructed: income and
population statistics of New England in
the seventeenth century. Roger. Weiss es-
timated the supply of money in the Ameri-
can colonies [122, 1970; 123, 1974]. So it
went, and goes.
-To some degree these waves of fact
originated inside. economics. . Yet . once
transferred to specialized historical econo-
mists such work developed a momentum
of its own. To take a recent example, the
successes of Friedman and Schwartz with
the American monetary statistics for 1867
to 1960 inspired historical work on earlier
American statistics, -then on British, and
now.on other countries [111, Temin, 1969;
103, Sheppard, 1971J. The historical study
of productivity change is : another irecent
example of transferred momentum:/The
early work by Abramovitz and Solow was;
like. that of Friedman. and Schwartz,
nomothetic rather than historical. In the
hands of historical economists, however, it
gave ;impetus to the construction of his-
torical series on the quantities and prices
of inputs and outputs useful far beyond
their initial purpose. Whether or not the
theories tested by such economic studies
It is not widely appreciated outside British eco-
nomic history that the "residual" (in its price dual
form) was invented in the 1920's for a historical study
of British and American industry by G. T. Jones in
his posthumous book Increasing Returns: A Study of
the Relation Betuween.the Size and Eficiency of In-
dustries, with Special Reference to the History of Se-
lected British and American Industries, 1850-1910
[57, 1933, p. 33]. As we shall see again below, reading
history has even its theoretical rewards.

Copyright @ 2001. All Rights Reserved.

[[PAGE 9]]
Journal of Economic Literature

[왼쪽 열]
442
survive the next twist in intellectual fash-
ion---theories of business cycles, consump-
tion, investment behavior, growth, money,
or productivity change-the urge to im-
plement them historically continues 'to
generate new and lasting facts.'
It will seem .strange to economists 'ex-
posed only to older writing on history or
to no writing on history at all to assert that
history is a rich mine of statistical informa-
tion. Badly educated economists believe
there-are :"no data" before the year in
which the reference book nearest to hand
begins its series on income or wages or
exports, and twenty years ago most histori-
ans, even economic historians, would have
agreed with them. Some still do, dropping
with relief the task 'of measurement
before 1900 as soon as they hit on one or
another specious reason for doing so: that
perfect accuracy is -not attainable '(esti-
mates have errors), that no individual pos-
sesses the attributes of the average in-
dividual (distributions have variances), or
that statistics dehumanize history (sets are
defined for limited characteristics of the
objects included): The economist should
be aware that the case against statistics in
history rests on such pitiable foundations,
however pleasing it may be for him to'sup-
pose that the historian possesses special
tools of insight superior to the spirit-killing
tools of his own trade. The computer and
the resulting advance in quantitative his-
tory, led by the new economic historians,
have in any case given statistical agnosti-
cism in history a quaint look.
The historical facts available: for : the
economist's work, in truth, are volumi-
nous beyond the wildest dreams of intel-
lectual avarice, extending back in dimin-
ishing volume to the Middle Ages: They
require only work and imagination. No
Ministry of Agriculture in the thirteenth
century collected : statistics on English
agricultural output for the' benefit of twen-
tieth-century students of agricultural eco-
nomics. Yet medievalists realized long ago

[오른쪽 열]
that the annual account of the bailiff to his
lord could yield such statistics for the lands
farmed by the lord himself; and they have
realized more recently 'that all the land,
farmed by the lord or by the peasants, paid
tithes to the Church, itself a literate and
methodical bureaucracy with a strong self-
interest in examining and preserving the
records of the tithe from year to year,
from which 'output can be estimated.10
A large investment, of course, is neces-
sary: to put such collections of facts into
usable form, and relative to the size of the
investment economic historians, for. all
their energy, have just begun. A 'case in
point is the astoundingly large collection
of genealogical records held for baptizing
the dead by the Mormon Church in Salt
Lake City,: records: yielding detailed
family histories for many generations.i1
But the student of inherited and acquired
human capital could find material for his
work that is less dificult than' this to han-
dle in the historical record were he to look
into it: Surveys; for example, are not a re-
cent invention. The history of Europe and
its offshoots from 1086 to 'the present is
littered with them. To take a compara-
tively recent example, in 1909 the United
States Immigration Commission collected
questionnaires from over half a million
wage earners, some 300,000 of them for-
eign born, and from 14,000 families total-
ling 60,000 people, asking them about
their occupation, wage income, employ-
ment, property income, earnings of the
household, housing, rent paid, children,
schooling, literacy, languages, money re-
mitted abroad, money when frst landed,
and many other matters. The Commission
: 10 Skeptics will find a look at J. Z. Titow convincing
on the wealth of data derivable from bailiffs' accounts
[116, 1972]. There does not appear to be a use of the
tithe in the English literature, but it has become a
commonplace in the French, as in J. Goy and E. Le
Roy Ladurie '[41, 1972].
i See the article by Clayne Pope and Larry Wim-
mer on these records, forthcoming in Historical
Methods Newsletter.

Copyright @ 2001. All Rights Reserved.

[[PAGE 10]]
McCloskey: On Economic History

[왼쪽 열]
surveyed employers: on a comparably
large scale. The results were published in
42 volumes, which still await the curiosity
of economists interested in the accunula-
tion of human capital, the life cycle of in.
come, the participation of women in the
labor force, migration, and .discrimina-
tion.12 Whenever men write down ac-
counts of their own or others' economic
activities the economist has more observa-
tions for his science. Economic historians
realize that men have been doing this for
a long time.
B. Better Economic Facts
The inspiration for reconstructing the
statistics of the past has not come from
economics alone, with the result that eco-
nomic historians can present to econo-
mists new classes of facts, richer in many
dimensions than modern facts. The very
deadness of the men'and companies of the
nineteenth century and before opens to
view records closed to an economist who
insists that his subjects be alive or recently
deceased: Only a successful antitrust suit
pries loose the records of General Elec-
tric's conspiracies in restraint of trade, yet
the student of industrial organization
could if he wished turn to business histori-
ans for information on the costs and bene-
fits of collusion that would bring statistical
life to his 'speculations on their magni-
tudes. The Department of Commerce, the
SEC, and the self-interest of the compa-
nies expose to public view some.scraps of
information about the costs, profits, and
investments of industrial firms; yet the stu-
dent of investment and finance could turn
to work such as Paul F. McGouldrick's
13 See R. Higgs [50, 1971] for a brief description
and use of the Report. Higgs used the published
volumes, but the manuscript questionnaires, if they
have survived, would be still more revealing. The
Report, incidentally, is a good example of the need
for historical sophistication in interpreting historical
statistics. It was a nativist and racist document, in the
candid style of the age of the Big Stick and the White
Man's Burden.

[오른쪽 열]
443
New England Textiles in the Nineteenth
Century: Profits : and Investment [70,
1968] for . much richer : information.13
Even for firms that have come now under
close and inquisitive government regula-
tion, such as banks, old records, -once con-
fidential and : therefore' candid .and
complete, are better than new [80, Olm-
stead, 1974].
Demographic history, long practiced
outside of economic history but now in-
fluencing it heavily, provides still more ex-
amples of the virtues of the dead as objects
of economic study. The very records 'of
death, probate inventories 'and wills, are
rich sources of facts (see A: H. Jones [56,
1972]). So too are counts of the once living.
The .100-year rule of disclosure in, say,
Britain makes it possible to do for the 1871
census of population what is impossible for
the 1971.census, to scrutinize samples or;
if one wishes, the entire population of all
coal-mining towns (with their startlingly
high fertility) or .of all industrial villages
(with their startlingly wide variation in
family structure).14 The critical item that
is missing in'any modern sample from the
census is :the person's name, fori without
his name one is unable to link the record
of the census to other records. To appreci-
ate the significance of this fact,: one has
only to reflect that men and governments
are more methodical in their record-keep-
ing and more bold--one might say imper-
tinent--in their curiosity today than they
were 'once, and' when some future eco-
nomic historian is able to trace people by
: Is Gavin Wright described this impressive study as
*the most 'vertically integrated' study of economet-
ric history to date. McGouldrick has performed ev.
ery 'stage of production' himself, from the basic
source work with a sample of Waltham-Lowell type
textile firms (1836-86) to sorting out the various con-
ceptual problems involved in measuring the capital
stock, output, capacity, etc., and finally, to regression
analysis of dividend and investment behavior" [132,
197i, p. 440].
14 See E. A. Wrigley [135, 1972], especially the es-
say by Michael'Anderson on the use of the British
census manuscripts for the study of family structure.

Copyright @2001.All Rights Reserved

[[PAGE 11]]
Journal of Economic Literature

[왼쪽 열]
444
their :narne (or social .security -number)
through all the records of. families, busi.
nesses; the IRS, the credit bureaus, the
schools, the hospitals, and the'courts, our
knowledge of economic behavior will, to
put it mildly, increase. It has occurred to
historical demographers that we need not
wait until the twenty-first century (and if
we wait we are liable in fact to be disap-
pointed, for the cheapening of travel and
the spread of the telephone--sans tap and
tape--has impoverished the written rec-
ord). If it is important for certain issues in
labor economics, for example, to have col- : :
lections of economic biographies of peo-":
ple, the historian stands ready :to supply
them in detail. The work of the Cam-
bridge Group for the History of Popula-
tion and Social Structure, building on the
work of French historical demographers
after the War, has developed two'centu-
ries of family histories in Britain from
'nominal record linkage,' to use the jar-
gon, applied to birth, death, and marriage
registers back to the sixteenth century.i
In what is perhaps the most ambitious proj-
ect of this sort to date, scholars:at the Uni-
versity of Montreal are reconstituting the
entire population of Quebec from the be-
ginning of 'the colony to the French and
Indian War, recording every notice of ev-
ery person in the remarkably complete
records of French Canada and linking
them. As. the age of economists and cal-
culators dawns, statistics such as these can
be linked with a widening array of records
on income, property holdings, business;
education, and the like to provide life his-
tories much superior to the recent samples
worked over so lovingly in'any current is-
sue of the Journal of Political Economy or
the American. Economic Review.,
1s A selection from the work of the Cambridge
Group is worth including in any reading list for the
new labor economics. For a nontechnical summary,
see E. A. Wrigley [134, 1969], and for a recent exam-
ple in detail of such work, T. P. R. Laslett [64, 1972]

[오른쪽 열]
The census is, of course, a survey on a
massive scale, and when the manuscripts
are openi.e., when the census is old...
there are few lirnits on economic curiosity:
The Parker-Gallman work mentioned ear-
lier, for example, 'matched the manu-
scripts of the American census of agricul-
ture in 1860'with those of the census of
population--matching: that cannot . be
done on recent, closed censuses; that is
without the name of the respondent---and
produced a full profile of those involved
in farming enterprises. Because the 1860
census inquired into the wealth of those
it surveyed, it is possible to examine the
determinants of the distribution of wealth
in 1860 at a level of detail unattainable
with modern records, and Lee Soltow is
currently exploiting these possibilities
[106, 1975]. Roger Ransom-and Richard
Sutch were able to extract from the manu-
script census of 1880 intimate details on
a random sample of 5,283 farms in the
South and to confront the issue of racial
discrimination more directly than is typi-
callyi' possible' with modern data [89,
forth.J. By comparison with such rich and
varied facts, the economist's usual store
looks pitiably thin.
Nor are the errors in these facts larger
than those in modern facts. It is naive on
two counts to believe that historical statis-
tics have larger errors, naive both in over-
estimating the quality of modern statistics
and in underestimating the quality of his-
torical statistics. When pressed an econo-
mist will usually admit that his data on,
say, prices in the American economy over
the last twenty years are in error to some
large and unknown degree because the
quality of the goods in question has im-
proved, because the list prices correspond
poorly with the transaction prices, be-
cause the definition and relevance of the
sample is in doubt, or because the price
index used corresponds poorly 'with the
conceptually correct definition. He will

Copyright @ 2001. All Rights Reserved.

[[PAGE 12]]
McCloskey: On Economic History

[왼쪽 열]
admit, too, that these errors introduce
biases of unknown 'sign into his multi-
variate regressions containing' prices as
an independent variable. He will run
the regressions anyway, comforting him-
self with the :mistaken reflections that
his data are as'good as one can get and
that his estimates are in any case consist-
ent.
Confronted on both sides by skepticism,
from his colleagues in history that statisti-
cal demonstrations in history are persua-
sive and from his colleagues in'economics
that historical statistics are reliable, the
historical economist. cannot take this line.
He has in fact developed an art of creative
self-doubt that is practiced in some other
felds of economics and might be with
profit practiced more widely. The habit of
testing the sensitivity of one's argunent to
possible errors in its data or possible mis-
takes in its analytical assumptions is wide-
spread among' scienitists and historians,
but is 'not among economists. Many, of
course, understand the frailty of "data"
and act on this understanding. The tradi-
tion 'of the National Bureau and of the
more careful empiricists outside it of pub-
lishing a full description of how data were
made and where they might be wrong, in
the hope (so often vain) that users will read
it, fits well with historiographic traditions:
in his preface to Albert Fishlow's Ameri-
can Railroads and the Transformation of
the Ante-Bellum Economy, Alexander
Gerschenkron drew special attention :to
"the statistical appendixes ir whichi the
author offers a full insight /into his laborat
tory and without which no real apprecia.
tion of the importance of'the study ahd the
validity of its interpretative'results is possi.
ble" [27, Fishlow, 1965, p. vi]. Yet it is
rare for the major journals in general eco-
nomics to publish factual revisionism such
as Robert J. Gordon's "'$45 Billion of U.S.
Private Investment Has Been Mislaid,"
perhaps because it is rare for 'economists

[오른쪽 열]
445
to write it [39, 1969].1 Zvi Griliches put
his finger: on the' reason many:economists
are uninterested in the sources of data and
their errors [42, 1974, p. 973]:
Much of the problem, I think, arises because of
the separation in economics between data pro-
ducers and data analyzers. By and large, we do ?
"not produce our own data and, hence, do not
feel responsible for it.17 :
For 'economic historians, required to
collect their own materials and imbued
with the historian's rather than the econo-
mist's attitude toward their handling, the
buck stops here. Robert Fogel's Railroads
and American 'Economic Growth [28,
1964] is perhaps the fullest example to
date of this attitude.1s Conbining the tra-
ditions of creative self-doubt in economic
history and in 'project evaluation, its 260
pages are directed' at producing 'éssen-
tially one 'number, the benefit half 'of a
cost-beneft study of nineteenth-century
investment in American railways. Fogel
began' this' research believing that"he
1o That George Jaszi of the U's. Department of
Commerce was able to argue in a comment that Got-
don had discovered nothing.new 'makes the other
point: details of data, even important details, are not
interesting to economists [55, 1970]. In his reply to
Jaszi, Gordon asserts that "the economics profession
and particularly production function investigators
had remained ignorant of government owned, pri-
vately operated capital" [40, 1970, p. 945] before his
article. This appears' to be correct.
17 Having drawn on Griliches's thinking here, it
would be inpolite to add that the studies on which
he comments make no attempt to remove errors by
emeasurement and embark instead, to repeat Leon-
tief's acerbic remark iquoted earlier, on "devising
new.'statistical  procedure, however tenuous,
that tmakes it possible to squeeze out one more un-
Kmowh' pararmeter from a given set of 'data" [66,
1971p: 3].:
1s Fogel's calculations were for 1890. Fishlow's
American Railroads is a similar study for the early
nineteenth century [27, 1965]. Together they consti-
tute a brilliant reinterpretation of the role of trans-
portation in American growth, for which they were
awarded in 1971 the Schumpeter Prize. The account
of Fogel's experience derives from conversations
with him..

Copyright @ 2001. All Rights Reserved.

[[PAGE 13]]
Journal of Economic Literature

[왼쪽 열]
446
would 'confirm the. assumption of the
indispensibility of the railways underlying
earlier treatments (by Schumpeter and
Rostow, for example), but found to his sur-
prise that the facts cast doubt on it. To test
this doubt, therefore, he directed his ener-
gies to estimating an upper bound on the
contribution of railroads to national .in-
come and found it low; therefore, he con-
cluded that railroads were far from indis-
pensible for. American economic growth.
Historical facts are often better for econo-
mists' purposes than recent facts: they are
often more detailed, voluminous, and ac-
curate, and what errors they contain are
treated with respect. :
But there is, of.course, another sense in
which they are "better," for history per-
forms experiments: history provides the
economist not only with more rich. and
accurate facts but also with more variable
facts. A macabre example of the point is
T. W. Schultz's use of Indian statistics of
agricultural output and population during
the influenza epidemic of 1918-19 to
argue that the marginal product of labor
was positive and roughly equal to the go-
ing wage: output fell as the working popu-
lation did, and labor therefore was not
"surplus," contrary to the assumption of
much work on' economic development,
particularly Indian economic develop-
ment [100, 1964, pp. 63-70]. An equally
dismal experiment, the Great Depression,
will remain for a long time to come the
great testing ground for theories of aggre-
gate economics, as monetarists, fiscalists,
and others have on occasion realized. The
appreciation 'of the pitfalls of monetary
policy was much increased by the argu-
ment of Friedman and Schwartz that, far
from having little impact, it was power-
fully mishandled in the 1930's; and the ap-
preciation of the potential of fiscal policy
was much increased by the argument of
E. Cary Brown that, far from failing, it was
not in fact tried [8, 1956] (see also L. C,
Peppers [85, 1973]).

[오른쪽 열]
That history has performed the very ex-
periment he wishes had been performed
must occur from time to time to every
economist. He must realize, too, that eco-
nomics is like astronomy: an observational
science, taking its data and its controls,
alas, as it finds them. Yet he fixes his tele-
scope (during his infrequent trips to the
observatory) on the sun, moon, and nearer
planets alone, for two reasons: first, he be
lieves that these objects close to home are
the. only: ones that provide : insight into
how the home planet behaves; and, sec-
ond, he believes that to look beyond the
near solar system, not to speak of the
galaxy, is to look into another structure,
where familiar .laws (e.g., there are six
planets, stars are little points fixed to a
sphere, and light moves in straight lines)
might not apply..The belief that history is
irrelevant to public policy will be exam-
ined below and will prove to be incorrect.
The incorrectness of the belief that history
might come from a different* structure
than the quarterly national income figures
since the War and is therefore to be ig-
nored is plain enough. To those who adopt
the argument in order to limit the amount
of empirical work they have to do, one can
only sigh and turn back to scholars who
take scholarship seriously. These inno-
cents will always believe that “empirical
work" is a conflation of the appendix to
the Economic Report of the President and
Johnston's Econometric Methods. Even se-
rious and sophisticated economic scholars
are prone to adopt the assumption.that the
past has a different structure without test-
ing it. The cliometricians have been
forced to .test the assumption at .every
turn, facing as they :do scholars in both
economics and in history who adopt it as
a matter of course. Indeed, if the findings
of the new economic history of the last
ffteen years .or so had to. be put in one
sentence, it would be this:. in the eight-
eenth and: nineteenth centuries men
sought profit in as clear-headed and com-

Copyright @ 2001. All Rights Reserved

[[PAGE 14]]
McCloskey: On Economic History

[왼쪽 열]
petitive a way as an economist dreaming
of auctioneers and perfect markets might
wish. Following Lenin and Veblen, of
course, one is free to assert that the atom-
istic competition of the age of Smith and
Mill is dead, that simple models of com-
petitive behavior might apply to the nine
teenth century but not to the twentieth.
This variant assertion, however, merely
reinforces the point, for it has never been
tested, at any rate not in a way that would
convince someone who did not believe it
to begin with, despite its large role in the
political economy of the last ffty years.
Even if one could show that for a particu.
lar experiment (the effect of government
spending on employment, say) the envi-
ronment of the nineteenth century was so
different from that of the 1970's that little
could be learned about the present struc-
ture from the comparison, it would re-
main true that structures continue to
change, as the often discouraging and
sometimes comical results of large 'scale
econometric models suggest. History, like
the study of other countries and cultures,
is'an education in structural: change. A
familiar example of the more usual prac-
tice is that of dropping the War years from
regressions, as intrusions from another
structure. Wars, however, recur, and it be-
hooves the economic scientist, even'if his
interests in science extend only to its uses
for today's public policy, to understand
how war changes the way economies
behave (see, for example, D. F. Gordon
and G. M. Walton [38, 1974] and Mancur
Olson [81, 1963]). Paul David put a similar
point in the following way [15, 1975, p.
14]:
An equation that fits the data well for half the
available run of time-series observations and
not for the rest is, for the ordinary applied
economist, a failure; he will have to resist the
impulse to discard the recalcitrant data in pre-
senting his results. By contrast : . . the eco-
nomic historian may hail the half-failed regres-
sion equation as nothing less. than a tri-

[오른쪽 열]
447
umph--in the sense that by uncovering the oc-
currence of a change in economic structure, it
signals him to set to work to learn what hap-
pened in history.
Limiting one's field of vision to close ob-
jects, in any case, is as peculiar in econom-
ics as it would be in astronomy. Examples
of historical experiments larger, clearer,
and more decisive than most that could be
framed on the basis of recent experience
can be generated at will. .The migrations
from one country or another in the last
twenty years that have alarmed modern
governments are dwarfed by the migra-
tions of the nineteenth .century.is The
same can be said of the migrations of capi-
tal: if one wishes to measure the effects of
foreign investment on the sending or re-
ceiving country, the British, French, Ar-
gentinian and .Canadian experiences of
the late nineteenth century are the best
available cases in point.20 From 1870 to
1913 Britain sent one-third.of her savings
abroad. If one wishes to measure the ef-
fects, burdensome or otherwise, of gov-
ernment debt, the British experience with
the debt from the Napoleonic War or the
American experience with the debt from
the Civil War are the. clearest. experi-
ments, taking place as they did before the
Internal (or Inland) Revenue codes among
other disturbing influences reached their
present chaotic state (for the American
case see J. G. Williamson [130, 1974]..In
the. 1820's the British government debt
was on the order of two and a half times
national income, about 'the 'same as the
'1s There is a voluminous literature by historical
economists on these: B. Thomas [i14, 1954], R. A.
Easterlin [22, 1961], and many more, among them
P. Hill [52, 1970], L. Neal and P. Uselding [75, 1972],
and A. C. Kelley [58, 1965].
20 See Michael Edelstein [24, 1974]. and works
cited there. The seminal work on the case of a receiv.
ing country is Jacob. Viner [120, 1924]. The other
books from the Taussig school of international fi-
nance published at Harvard in the 1920's and 1930's
were also richly historical: J. H. Williams [128, 1920],
H. D. White [126, 1933], and W. F. Beach [4, 1935].
Taussig himself as a young man wrote history [10i,
1888].

Copyright @ 2001. All Rights Reserved.

[[PAGE 15]]
Journal of Economic Literature

[왼쪽 열]
448
present ratio in the United States.21 If :one
wishes'to 'measure' the impact of legal
changes, the experiences in the nine-
teenth century and before with laws 'of
incorporation, school attendance, child la-
bor, and the like are large and varied ex-
periments [109, Sylla, 1969; 63, Landes
and Solmon, 1972; 124, West, 1975; 99,
Sanderson, 19741. So too, if one wishes to
measure the impact of foating exchange
rates, are the experiences of the United
States in the 1860's and 1870's, of Britain
from 1914' to 1925, or 'of China in the
1930's. In a time of free banking, as in the
United States . before the Civil War, one
can examine the consequences of free
entry [92, Rockoff, 1974]; in a time of war
and unfettered capital markets, as during
the Civil War, one can examine the re-
sponsiveness of expectations to events [94,
Roll, 1972]; in a time of massive new in-
vestment in public hygiene, as in Ameri-
can cities after the Civil War, one can ex-
amine the value of health [71, Meeker,
1972; 72, 19741. History is society's labora-
tory.
C. Better Economic Theory
The products of this' laboratory affect
economic ideas in ways that few econo.
mists recognize: The headline of today's
newspaper, to be sure, has an effect, the
as One must include gross social security wealth,
gross of the present value of social security taxes (as
estimated by Martin Feldstein [26, 1974, p. 915, col.
3]). In 1971 GNP was. on the order of $1,000 billion,
the gross government debt $400 billion, and Feld-
stein's estimate of gross social security wealth $2,000
billion, for a ratio of about 2.4. In 1821 the GNP of
the United Kingdom was on the order of f340 mil.
lions (based on the 'P. Deane and W. A. Cole [19,
1962] estimnate for Great Britain increased by an esti-
mate of Irish income at two-thirds the British level
per capita) and the funded and, unfunded govern-
ment debt f840 million [73, Mitchell, 1962, pp. 8,
366, 402], for a ratio of about 2.5: The ratio of pay-
ments of interest to GNP in the U.K. in 1821 was 9
percent, about the same as interest, income security,
and veterans benefits and services to GNP in the
U.S.A. in 1971, namely, 8 percent [73, Mitchell, 1962,
p. 396; 119, Economic Report of the Presidenit, 1975,
p. 325j. These comparisons could be refined to in-
clude iocal governments and non-interest-bearing
debt.

[오른쪽 열]
more so as money for research follows the
headline with a short lag. But historical
findings, true or false, underlie the reac-
tion to the headline. To pick some influen-
tial historical findings .that have recently
been shown to be false by cliometricianis,
the finding that the increase in the capital
stock per man left much of the increase in
income per man unexplained set off in the
late. 1950's an intellectual explosion in
models. of growth : with. technological
change. :The historical finding that the
rate of savings was constant over a long
period set off in the early 1950's a some-
what smaller explosion in the theory of the
consumption function. The historical find-
ing that the share of labor in income has
been constant set off in the 1930's still an-
other in the theory of the production func-
tion. The infuence of economic theory on
the writing of history is apparent in most
pieces of new economic history, but the
infuence of economic history on the writ-
ing of theory is apparent only in the semi-
nal pieces, to be forgotten in the sequel.
The high ratio. of historical reserves to the-
oretical deposits in the work of Robert So-
low, Milton Friedman,:or Paul Douglas is
not maintained in the work of their intel-
lectual custorners, with the result that the
intellectual money supply is a large multi-
ple of the factual base and subject to vio-
lent fiuctuations. Rondo Cameron put the
point well:
In analogous discussions concerning the role of
theory in historical research the argument is
frequently made (perhaps because it is valid)
that the historian will inevitably be guided by
some a priori ideas. It is desirable, therefore, .
that these ideas be made explicit and systema-
tized if possible. The choice, in other words, is
not between theory and no theory, but explicit,
consciously formulated theory and implicit, un-
conscious theorizing. Much the same can be
said for the use of history by theorists. Even the
most 'scornful ahistorical .economist makes
some use of history: his own 'experience, the
experience of his generation, or the loose his-
torical generalizations which abound in the
folklore of even highly sophisticated societies.
[9, 1965, p. 112; cf. 74, Mitchell, 1927, p. 59.]

Copyright @ 2001. All Rights Reserved.

[[PAGE 16]]
McCloskey: On Economic History

[왼쪽 열]
The obvious case in point is the theory
of economic growth, in which a particular
set of historical conventions dominate the
argument. These conventions---described
by Nicholas Kaldor in 1958 as "stylized
facts," a defensive usage that has been
adopted widely---were developed in the
1950's, once intellectual putty but now
clay, before new economic historians had
begun in earnest to announce the unstyl-
ized facts. It is at least uncertain that their
work will confirm the :'constancy of the
capital/output ratio, of the rate of proft,
or of the rate of growth of output per man
and of the capital stock. As Robert Solow
remarks at the conclusion of a brief in-
quiry into the factual relevance of these
elements in the steady state of econonic
growth, "the steady state is not a bad place
for the theory of growth to start, but may
be a dangerous place for it to end': [105,
1970, p. 7]. From the historical work by
economists over the last two decades or so,
ignored by growth theorists, it would
seem 'so. During 'the second half of the
nineteenth century, for example, the capi.
tal/output ratio in America rose by a fac-
tor of two, while falling by a third in Brit-
ain; during the first half of the twentieth
century, the ratio in America fell 22 per-
cent, while remaining roughly constant in
Britain.22 It may be that a fuller definition
*2 For the United Kingdom this is the ratio in 1855,
1900, and 1958 of fixed reproducible capital net of
depreciation to net domestic product (see C. H. Fein-
stein Tables 43 and 20, with an allowance for capital
consumption based on Table 1 [25, 1972]); for the
United States the ratios in 1844-53, 1894-1903, and
1958 of depreciable capital to net national product
(Gallman's Table 2.9 in Davis et al. [18, 1972]). The
two books from which these figures come, inciden-
tally, illustrate the role of social observatories in the
encouragement of new economic history: Feinstein's
is one of a series published under the auspices of the
National Institute of Econornic and Social Research
(the British equivalent of the NBER) and the Cam-
bridge Department of Applied Economics (an inter-
pretive volume by Feinstein and R. C. O. Matthews
is to follow); eight of the twelve authors of the Davis
et al. book have worked at the NBER, and the book
itself amounts to an interpretive summary of the long
inquiry by them and others (notably Sirmon Kuznets)
at the Bureau into trends in American economic
growth.

[오른쪽 열]
449
of. "capital". to include 'acquired . human
skills and a fuller definition of *'output"' to
include production in the ' household
would yield different results. Economic
historians, facing long periods of history in
which the relation of the narrow to the full
definitions have changed radically, are
forced routinely to consider refinements
of this sort: Whether:refined or not the
facts accurnulated by them for the study
of economic growth: warrant a second
look. This is perhaps most clear in the mat-
ter' of. technological change, the 'chief
jewel and the chief embarrassment of the
modern theory of growth: As R. R. Nelson
and S. : G: Winter have recently empha-
sized [76, 1974], historians of technology
such as Paul David, Peter Temin, and Na-
than :Rosenberg have much to tell the
theorists, but the theorists' minds are fixed
on other things (see, e.g.,.Rosenberg [95,
1972] or David [15, 1975]):
The sins of pseudo-history are not, of
course, confined to mathematical theorists
of economic growth. There is nothing in
words as distinct from equations, however
frequent the appeals in the words to the
alleged experience of history, 'that Ipro-
tects looser. theorizers from the error .of
irrelevancy. Ricardo's notion of rising land
rents, Marx's of immiserization of the in-
dustrial proletariate, Lenin's of the profits
from imperialism, Dennis Robertson's of
foreign 'trade as an 'engine of growth,
Harold Innis's of staple products as centers
of growth, W, :A.. Lewis's of development
with unlimited supplies of labor, or w. W.
Rostow's of a take-off induced by great in-
ventions and a sharp rise in the savings
rate, to name a few, have not fared well
in confrontation with historical fact.23 This
-3 See, in order, P. Lindert [68, 1974];. R. M. Hart-
well [46, 1970]; R. P. Thomas [115, 1968]; I. B. Kravis
[62, 1970]; E. J: Chambers and D. F. Gordon [1],
i966]; A..C. Kelley, J. G. Williamson, and R. J. Chee-
tham [59, 1972]; and W. w. Rostow, ed. [97, 1963].
The work by Fishlow and Fogel on the American
railway in the nineteenth century was in part moti-
vated by Rostow's large claims for it as the critical
innovation in American growth.

Copyright @ 2001. All Rights Reserved.

[[PAGE 17]]
Journal of Economic Literature

[왼쪽 열]
450
is not to say that theorists should forsake
their blackboards or their typewriters for
the.nearest archive. An occasional trip to
the library night help. And they should be
doubtful of their own unassisted ability to
summarize historical experience in a few
stylized facts.
The contribution of history to theory is
not confined.to a supply of factual grist for
the theorists' mill. The. use of theory in
economic history illuminates the. theory
and tests it, and in this respect economic
history is no.different from other applied
economics. An application of input-output
analysis to the measurement of effective
protection in nineteenth-century America
tests the usefulness of this tool in the same
way as does an application to the measure-
ment of effective protection in present-
day . Pakistan [127,. Whitney, 1968; 43,
Guisinger, 1970]. An agricultural econo-
mist, at least, would be comfortable with
the use of simple models of supply 'and
demand to explore. the growth of the
American shipbuilding, cotton textile, or
iron industries, and would not be sur-
prised that: use :deepens them.24 Nor
would the student of international trade,
aggregate 'economics, or :labor markets
find anything strange in :applications of
models of two sector general equilibrium
to the American economy before and after
the Civil War or to the British economy
during the Napoleonic War,25 of money
and prices to the British and American
business cycle in the early nineteenth cen-
tury [113, Temin, .1974], or of marginal
24 See among many others C. K. Harley [45, 1973];
R. B. :Zevin [138, '1971]; and R. W. Fogel and
S. L. Engerman [29, 1969], reprinted in Fogel and
Engerman [30, 1971]. This book [30, 1971], inciden-
tally, is a good selection of work on America by new
economic historians, as is P. Temin [112, 1973].
25 See C. Pope [87, 1972]; P. Passell and G. Wright
[84, 1972]; P. Passell and M. Schmundt [83, 1971]; G.
Hueckel [53, 1973]; and, the most ambitious work to
date along these lines, J. G. Williamson [130, 1974].
Cliometricians have been among the few economists
to use non-linear general equilibrium models empiri-
cally.

[오른쪽 열]
productivity : to. slavery or post-bellum
sharecropping.a6 He might be a little sur-
prised that such remote issues can be
reached with tools perfected in the mid-
dle of the twentieth century and might.
too, admire the skill with which issues long
cut .off from ..economic · thinking are
brought back to it. But on the whole he
would perceive good economic history to
be simply good applied economics.
It should be pointed out, parentheti-
cally, that in an important sense his .per-
ception would be wrong, for good eco.
nomic. history must also be good history.
It is this requirement that puts economic
history at the highest levels on a par of
dificulty with, say, econometrics at the
highest levels, which requires a mastery of
statistics, or . mathematical economics at
the highest levels, which requires a mas-
tery of mathematics.27 True, some new
economic: historians .believe ' that. eco-
nomic history consists of the application of
production theory or econometrics to a
more or less vague notion of what hap
pened in history, just as other economists
believe that economic thinking consists of
the application of Lagrangean multipliers
or optimal control theory to a more or less
vague notion of what is to be maximized.
But the best new economic historians are
historians as well as economists, just as the
best economists are social scientists as well
as applied mathematicians.
Even at the lower levels of historical as
distinct from economic sophistication,
26 C. D. Goldin [36, 1973; 37, 1976] and Fogel and
Engerman [31, 1974] are recent examples of a large
literature on slavery deriving from the early work of
Conrad and' Meyer [13, 1958]. J. D. Reid, Jr. [9],
1973] is an example of an equally large literature on
sharecropping by cliometricians, among them Rob-
ert Higgs [51, 1974], Stephen DeCanio [20, 1974],
and Roger Ransom and Richard Sutch [89, forth.].
27 Any economic historian has had the experience
of .colleagues announcing to him that they, too, are
economic historians. It usually develops that they
have run a regression back to. 1929. The effect is
similar to that of an economist who uses arithmetic
announcing to his colleagues in mathematical eco-
nomics that he, too, is a mathematical economist

Copyright @ 2001. All Rights Reserved.

[[PAGE 18]]
McCloskey: On Economic History

[왼쪽 열]
however, reforming the economic history
of the late 1950's into'good applied 'eco-
nomics, exhibiting in the reformation the
power of modern economic theory, was a
remarkable : achievement, : comparable
with the reformations over the last decade
in the economics of politics, property
rights, labor markets; and the household.
For a time the new economic historians,
like the new labor economists and the rest,
devoted themselves to this task of intellec-
tual arbitrage. But the theoretical rewards
of economic history are greater. Any ex-
tension of econonics to new subjects sets
new questions with which existing theory
cannot deal, and for which new theory
must. be created. : .Econornic historians
have been bold in this. Their theoretical
boldness arises in part from the recalci-
trance of the world: when the scholar's
chief purpose is to understand a piece of
behavior, historical or current, rather than
to test a familiar economic idea (still less
to develop its logic), he takes his insights
from wherever he can get them, whether
or not they bear the imprimatur of an eco-
noinic 'bishop:28 It arises, too, from the
unusually. close contact that historical
economists have with another discipline,
history. They have internalized the intel-
lectual values of historians more than soci-
ological economists have : internalized
those of sociologists or :legal economists
those of lawyers, and in consequence are
peculiarly inclined .to face questions for
which economics has no ready answer. A
case in point is the question of why politi-
cal and social revolutions occur, a question
that even most political scientists and soci-
ologists, contrary to' what one might ex-
s A good example is J. G. Williamson, especially
Chapter V [129, 1964]. After using without success
the usual theories to explain the American balance
of payments in the nineteenth century, he devel-
oped finally what is now known as the monetary the-
ory, anticipating by several years its first theoretical
statement. P. B. Whale, beginning with a similar his.
torical problem, had done the same in 1937 [125,
1937].

[오른쪽 열]
451
pect, carefully avoid. It is impossible for a
historian who wishes to write coherent
history to avoid the question, even if he
wished to, for 'revolutions, such ' as the
American Revolution and the Civil War,
are the stuff of change and change the stuff
of history.a9 For this reason a good deal of
the new economic history in America has
centered around the causes of the Revolu-
tion and the Civil .War, approaching 'the
causes (as comparative advantage dictates)
with the characteristically economic as-
sumption 'of rational and -informed :self-
interest. The new economic history made
a contribution, albeit a modest one, to the
understanding of the American Revolu-
tion -by. measuring the economic burden
of the Navigation Acts and finding it small
(see : P: -D: .McClelland [69,: 1969] and
works cited there); it made a contribution
to the understanding of the Civil War by
measuring the economic burden on the
South of the tarif or of the restrictions on
the expansion of slavery and finding these
also to be small [87, Pope, 1972; 84, Passell
and Wright, 1972]. If one. believes that
economic interests . determine s political
behavior, then, one can look to new 'eco-
nomic historians for measurements :of
these interests. If one does not believe it,
one can look to new economic historians
for whatever economic measure is to the
point: by showing, for example, that slav-
ery was not : economically moribund on
the eve' of the Civil War, the new eco-
nomic historians were able to reject the
theme ,of many historians sympathetic
with the South that military intervention
29 Coherence was sacrificed for the gains from spe-
cialization in the collective volume by Davis, Easter-
lin, Parker, and others [18, 1972], in so many other
ways such a fine summary of the work of the cliomet-
ricians. Its focus on the economic revolution (its sub.
title. was "An Economist's History of the United
States') required it to by-pass the contributions of
new economic history to political history. The Revo-
lution, Jackson and the Second Bank, the tariff, slav.
ery, the Civil War, and the free coinage'of silver
occupy, according to the index, 20 pages in total,
smaller than the single entry :"Canals."

Copyright @2001.All Rights Reserved

[[PAGE 19]]
Journal of Economic Literature.

[왼쪽 열]
452
to abolish slavery was. unnecessary.30 : In
any case, the application of economics to
politics raises the theoretical issue, neg-
lected by most economists (namely, 'most
economists to the left of Milton Friedman
and to the right of Paul Sweezy), of bring-
ing politics into economic models.31
The new economic history has turned
increasingly in the past few years to issues
such as this, central to the development of
economics as a social science. The deepen-
ing of the study 'of American slavery; for
example, notably by Fogel and Engerman
in their..recent book [31,. 1974], has
opened the issue of the role of coercion in
economic society. Outside the growing
band of Marxist economists, who are like
their colleagues : on the -right unusually
historically-minded, the limit of thinking
on the matter in economics has been an
occasional ' remark on  command com-
pared with market economies; assuming
in the background that market economies
use little coercion beyond taxes; enforce-
ment of contract, and the criminal law.
The assumption has never been appropri-
ate for that quarter of the population un-
der the age of responsibility, and in a slave
society, of course, it is still less appropriate.
Fogel and Engerman were able to show;
however, that Southern slaveowners, capi-
talistic as they -were, used market mech-
anisms as well as the whip to manipulate
their slaves. In *Slavery: The Progressive
Institution? a long review of the book.
two other econornic historians; Paul David
3o This was explicit in Conrad and. Meyer [13.
1958], although it was not put on a firm base until
Y. Yasuba [136, 1961]. Cf. G. Gunderson [44, 1974].
a1 Violent revolution and civil war are not the only
political evenits to attract the attention of new eco-
nomic historians: see J. Pincus [86, 1972] on the
causes of early nineteenth-century .tariffs; E. P. Le-
Veen [67, 1971] on the British suppression of the
slave trade; R. B: Freeman [32, 1972]-an example
of fne historical work by a non-historian--on the rise
of educational discrimination in the South; R. Higgs
[49, 1971, chap. IV] and J. Bowman and R. H. Keehn
[5, 1974] on agrarian protest in the late nineteenth
century; and G. Wright [133, 1974] on the political
economy of New Deal spending.

[오른쪽 열]
and Peter Temin, argued that .the eco-
nomic theory to deal with such mixed sys-
tems of enticement and coercion does.not
exist [16, -1974;.esp. pp. 778-83]. It may
not, and this is:the challenge to theory.
: The challenges arise from the wide per-
spective forced on the economic historian
by .his subject. :Obviously, one: cannot
study the long swing, if one .wishes to,
without long :swings in income [61, Klotz
and Neal,; 1973]; 'one cannot study :the
long-run.determinants of city size without
long runs of city sizes [108, Swanson and
Williamson, 1974]. But the point goes
deeper than this. An economist whose at-
tention is riveted on the present cannot be
expected'to ask why the institutions of the
labor and capital market change, as Lance
Davis -and Douglass North did in Institu-
tional Change and American Economic
Growth [17, 1971], still less to ask why fun-
damental. social arrangements rise :and
decay, as North and Robert Thomas did in
The Rise of the. Western World [79, 1973]:
At a more modest level, few. economists
outside of agricultural economics and eco-
nomic history have given serious attention
to measuring (as distinct from theorizing
about) : managerial ability or, in . more
elaborate language, entrepreneurship,
that phantom. of the theory of the firm.
The measurement was forced on econo-
mists studying agriculture by. the insist-
ence of government planners who were
not economists that farmers are irrational;
it was forced on economists studying the
Victorian economy by the' insistence of
historians who were not economists that
British businessmen in'the late nineteenth
century were irrational as well (98, Sand-
berg, 1974]. And even agricultural econo-
mists, on the whole. exceptional among
economists for their long historical per-
spective, .cannot be expected 'to ask why
the peculiarities of peasant land tenure
have survived in many counitires for cen-
turies and why they were dissolved in land
reform.

Copyright @ 2001. All Rights Reserved.

[[PAGE 20]]
McCloskeu: On Economic History

[왼쪽 열]
- The Icelandic poet Einor Benediktsson
look/ . If originality you wish to build;/
Without the teaching of the past/ You see
not what is new."32
D. Better Economic Policy
Few intellectual activities are more mis-
chievous when done poorly than econom-
ics or history. The power of fallacious eco-
nomic reasoning or fallacious historical
example to damage society is obvious: the
pseudo-economics of mercantilism has
been reducing trade and protecting
vested interests for many 'centuries; the
pseudo-history of the Aryan: :"race" lent
dignity to German fascism. The :combina-
tion of bad economics and bad history in
bad economic history is pernicious. To be
sure, the makers of economic policy have
ample opportunity for falling into error
without the iexcuse of economic history
poorly grasped. Yet, to specialize Keynes's
frequently quoted remarks on the sub-
ject--frequently. quoted, : perhaps,. be-
cause they are correct--the ideas of eco-
nomic historians, both when they are right
and when they are wrong, are more pow-
erful than is commonly understood. Mad-
men in authority, who hear voices in the
air, are distilling their frenzy from an un-
derstanding of the economic events of a
few years back:iPractical men, who be.
lieve themselves to be quite exempt from
any historical influences, are usually the
slaves of historical example. .
The industrial revolution, : it is . said,
came to Britain suddenly and . simply
around 1760 in a wave of gadgets, justify-
ing policies for growth'that equip illiterate
peasants with computers: Foreign trade,
it' is said; was an engine of economic
growth in Britain (and, lately, Japan), jus-
tifying a policy of impoverishing one's citi-
zens in the pursuit of exports. Floating ex-
change rates, it is said, added to the chaos
3a I owe this quotation to Jon Sigurdsson' of the
Icelandic Economic Development Institute. :

[오른쪽 열]
453
of : the :international. 'economy: in.: the
1930's, justifying the . sacrifice of employ-
ment to the maintenance of $4.86, $2.80,
$2.40, "0r (most recently) : $2.00 .to the
pound sterling. Railways, it. is said, . were
crucial to industrialization' in the nine-
teenth "century, " justifying policies in
nonindustrial countries in the twentieth of
shoring up railways with subsidies and of
eliminating trucking competition: Indus-
trialization, it is said, brutalized the work-
ing class, justifying among most educated
people a deep.suspicion of capitalism.La-
bor unions, it is said, were. responsible for
a good part of the increase in wages since
1900, justifying government protection of
extortionate plumbers, electricians, and
butchers. The .competitive : supply. of
professional services in: the ' nineteenth
century, it is said, grieviously injured: con-
sumers, justifying official cartels of doctors
and undertakers. Business monopoly, it is
said, has spread greatly. during the last
century, justifying public hostility towards
big business. The payment of competitive
interest on demand or time deposits, it is
said, created instability in the banking sys-
tem, justifying laws to forbid it.iAir: pollu.
tion, it is said, is worse now than it was
once, justifying draconic policies to com-
bat it. Fossil fuel, it is said, is being used
at a faster rate relative to proven reserves
now than fifty years ago; justifying' na-
tional goals of subsidizing new fuels and
abandoning international, trade in oil.
Whether these are good or bad policies,to
the extent that their public propaganda
and their private inspiration rest on false
historical premises--and most of them ito
a large extent do-their rationale is full of
doubt.':
: : One 'could add cases. in point without
limit, but'two: of the more irnportant will
sufice. The muddle of exchange rates in
the 1920's and 1930's.led to the develop-
ment of thie elasticities' approach 'to the
balance of payments, which to this day
dominates theory and policy. . The ap-

Copyright @ 2001. All Rights Reserved.

[[PAGE 21]]
Journal of Economic Literature

[왼쪽 열]
454
proach has been under attack now for sev.
eral years on logical ground, but the devel.
opment of an alternative will depend on
a reinterpretation of past experience with
exchange rates.33 The muddle of employ-
ment in the 1930's and the interpretation
of the muddle by. Keynes and others led
to the postwar policy of full employment
and to a concentration on fiscal methods
to achieve it. Their interpretation bears
rethinking. As Hugh Rockoff remarked in
a recent survey of the American experi-
ence with free entry to banking, "One
purpose of history is to broaden our con-
ception of the possible" [93, 1975, p. 176].
The apprehension of true history as well
as the correction of false contributes to
public policy because an economist whose
memory is limited to the recent past has
a narrow conception of .the possible. We
may in our praise and criticism of present
governments be. willing or unwilling
slaves of historical example, but slaves we
are.
E. Better Economists
In the light of all this, it is not surprising
that Smith and Marshall, Schumpeter and
Keynes :were: deeply historical in their
thinking. An economist, least of all a cli-
ometrician, cannot argue that there are no
substitutes for history in the production of
important economics, no more than he
can argue that there was no substitute
for the railway in American economic
growth. Some' important economics has
been written by historical illiterates, al-
though it must be admitted that cases are
difficult to find: The work of Edgeworth as
distilled in modern textbooks, for exam-
ple, seems a likely candidate until one
reads the work itself and stumbles .over
tags frorn Herodotus. In much of the work
' 33 Presently much of the effort of the International
Trade Workshop at the University of Chicago is de-
voted to applying the "monetary" approach to the
experience of England, France, and Japan before the
Second World War.

[오른쪽 열]
of J. R. Hicks it is not obvious that history
plays a part, yet he lectured on medieval
history in one of his early academic ap-
pointments, has been by his own account
a lifelong reader of the Economic History
Review, and published in 1969 A Theory
of Economic History [48, 1969, p. v] (see
also [47, 1953]). History is a stimnulus to the
economic imagination, : : defining': and
stretching the limits of economic 'craft. An
economist learns from his other studies
how to see, to label, and to repair 'the
pieces of the economic building. From his-
tory he learns whence the building came,
how its neighbors were built, and why a
building in one place was and will be built
differently from one in another. The wider
questions that face economics are histori-
cal. If history is useful to an economist's
work, it is still more useful to his educa-
tion.
It would be unreasonable to propose in
the style of the German historical school
that history dominate the education of
economists, that abstractions of maximiza-
tion be abandoned in favor of the con-
creteness (or, more commonly in practice,
the verbal .abstractions) of history. The
reaction to this unreasonable proposal, in-
deed, explains some of the drift towards
present-mindedness in modern econom-
ics. Yet, as the English economic historian
T. S..Ashton said [3, (1946) 1971, p: 177]:
The whole discussion as to whether deduction
or induction is the proper method to use in the
social sciences is, of course, juvenile: it is as
. though we were to debate whether it were bet-
ter to hop on the right foot or on'the left. Sensi-
ble men with two feet know that they are likely
to make better progress if they waik on both.
An economist hopping along without a his-
torical leg, unless he is a decathalon ath-
lete, has a narrow perspective on the pre-
sent, : shallow : economic ideas, . little
appreciation for the strengths and weak-
nesses of economic data, and small ability
to apply economics to large issues. If we
interrogate our students, we will find that

Copyright @2001.All Rights Reserved

[[PAGE 22]]
McCloskey: On Economic History

[왼쪽 열]
they believe economic research to consist
chiefly of a passing acquaintance with the
latest pronouncement: of the Council of
Economic Advisors, the latest assumption
relaxed in an economic model, and the
latest revision in the local canned' regres-
sion program. One does not have to look
beyond their teachers to find where they
acquired this peculiar set of notions.
For fifteen years or so cliometricians
have been explaining to their colleagues
in history the wonderful usefulness of eco-
nomics. It is time they began explaining
to their colleagues in economics the won-
derful usefulness of history. Wonderfully
useful it is, a storehouse of.economic facts
tested by skepticism, a collection of ex-
periments straining the power of econom-
ics in every direction, a fount of economic
ideas, a guide to policy, and a school for
social scientists. It is no accident that some
of the best minds in economics value it
highly. What a pity, then, that the rest
have drifted away. Does the past have use-
ful economics? Of course it does. :
REFERENCES**
1. AMERICAN.
ECONOMICASSOCIA-
TIoN. Index of economic. journals.
Vols. I-VI.. Homewood, Ill.: Irwin,
1961-65.
2. ANDERSON,. T.: "The Economic
Growth . of Seventeenth-Century
New England: A Measurement of Re-
gional Income," unpublished . doc-
toral, 'dissertation,
University of
Washington, 1972.
3. AsHToN, T. S. "The Relation of Eco-
nomic History to Economic Theory,
Economica, N. S., May 1946, 13, pp.
81-96; reprinted in The study of ec0-
** A complete bibliography on American eco-
nomic history useful to economics, even if confined
to "cliometrics" in its recent incarnation, would run
to many hundreds of items. This selection misses
much important work. Items 18, 30, 49, 88, 112, 130,
and 132 contain alternative selections. :

[오른쪽 열]
455
:: nomic: history..:Edited :by N. B.
HARTE. London:: Frank Cass, 1971,
pp. 161-80.
4. BEACH, W. F. British international
gold movements and banking'policy,
1881-1913.  Canbridge: . Harvard
University Press, 1935.
5. 'BOWMAN, J. AND KEEHN, R. H.
"Agricultural Terms of Trade in Four
Midwestern States; 1870--1900," J.
Econ. Hist., Sept. 1974, 34, pp. 592-
609.
6. BRADY; D. S.,'ed. Output, employ-
ment, and productivity in the United
States after 1800. Conference on Re-
'search in Income and Wealth, Stud-
: ies in Income and Wealth, Vol. 30.
New York: National Bureau of Eco-
nomic Research; distributed by Co-
lumbia University Press, 1966.
7. BRONFENBRENNER, M."Trends, Cy-
cles, and Fads in Economic Writing,"
Amer. Econ. Rev., Supplement, May
1966, 56(2), pp. 538-52.
: 8. BRowN, E. C. "Fiscal Policy in the
"Thirties: : A . Reappraisal," Amer.
: Econ. Rev.,; Dec. 1956, :46(5), , pp.
857-79.
9. CAMERON, R. *Has Economic His-
tory a Role in an Economist's Educa-
tion?" Amer. Econ. Reo.,supple-
ment, May 1965, 55(2), pp. 112-i5.
-10. CAvES, R. "Export-Led Growth and
the New Economic History, in
Trade, balance' of. payments and
growth. Edited by J. N. BHAGWATI et
al: Amsterdam: North Holland,-1971.
11. CHAMBERS, E. J: AND GORDON, D. F.
"Primary Products and Economic
Growth: An : Empirical Measure-
ment," J. Polit. Econ., Aug. 1966, 74
(4), pp. 315-32.
12. CoATs, A. W. "The Role of Scholarly
Journals in the History of Economics:
An Essay, J. Econ. Lit., March 1971,
9(1);, pp. 29-44.
-13. CONRAD, A. H. AND MEYER, J. R.
"The Economics of Slavery in the

Copyright @ 2001. All Rights Reserved.

[[PAGE 23]]
Journal of Economic Literature

[왼쪽 열]
456
Ante-Bellum -South," J. Polit. Econ.,
: April 1958, 66, pp. 95-130; reprinted
in [14, 1964].
.14.
. The economics of slavery and
.. other studies in econometric history.
Chicago: Aldine, 1964.
15. DAVID, P. A. Technical choice, inno-
vation and economic growth: Essays
on American and British experience
in the nineteenth century. New York
and London: Cambridge University
Press, 1975.
16.
- AND TEMIN, P. "Slavery: The
Progressive Institution?"". J. Econ.
Hist., Sept. 1974, 34, pp: 739-83.
17: DAVIS, L. E. AND.NORTH, D. C. Insti-
tutional change and. American eco-
nomic .growth. -Cambridge: .Cam-
bridge University Press, 1971.
I8. DAVIS, L. E.; EASTERLIN, R. A.;
PARKER, W. N. ANDOTHERS. Ameri-
can economic growth: An -econo-
mist's. history of. the United States.
New York: Harper and Row, 1972.
19. DEANE, P: AND COLE, W. A. British
economic growth, 1688-1959. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press,
1962.
20. DECANIO, S. Agricultural 'produc-
tion, supply and institutions in the
post-Civil War South. Cambridge:
M.I.T, Press, 1974.
2l. EASTERLIN, R. A.."Interregional Dif.
ferences in : Per :Capita Income,
Population, and Total Income, 1840--
1950," in [82, Parker, 1960]. .
22.
"Influences. in . European
Overseas Emigration before World
War. I" Econ. Dev. Cult. Change,
-April 1961, 9, pp. 331-51.
23.
.---. Population, labor force, and
long swings in economic growth: The
. American *experience.New. .York:
: : NBER; distributed.by Columbia Uni-
.versity'Press, 1968.
24. EDELSTEIN, M. "The Determinants
of U: K: Investment Abroad, 1870--
1913: The U.S. Case," J. Econ. Hist.,
Dec. 1974, 34(4), pp. 980-1007.

[오른쪽 열]
25. FEINSTEIN, C. H. :National income,
expenditure .. and. : output of .the
United Kingdom, :1855-1956. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press,
1972.*
26. 1
FELDSTEIN,- M: *Social Security, In-
duced Retirement, . and : Aggregate
Capital :': Accumulation, . J.': Polit.
Econ.; -Sept./Oct: : 1974, 82(5), . pp.
905-26.
27. FISHLow, A.. American railroads
and the transformation of the Ante-
bellum economy. Cambridge: Har-
vard University Press, 1965.
28. FoGEL, R. W. Railroads and Ameri-
can econonic growth: Essays in eco-
nometric history. Baltimore:. Johns
Hopkins Press, 1964.
29.
AND ENGERMAN, S. L. “A
Model for the Explanation of Indus-
trial Expansion during. the Nine-
teenth Century: With an Application
to the American Iron Industry," J.
Polit. Econ., May/June. 1969, 77(3),
pp. 306-28.:
30.
AND ENGERMAN, S. L., eds.
The reinterpretation of American
economic history. New York: Harper
and Row, 1971.
31.
AND ENGERMAN, S. L...Time
on : the. cross: The . economics of
American negro slavery. 2 vois. Bos-
ton: Little, Brown, 1974.
32. FREEMAN, R. B. "Black-White In-
come Differences:. Why Did They
Last So Long?' unpublished manu-
script, Harvard University, 1972.
33. FRIEDMAN, M. AND SCHWARTZ, A. J.
A monetary history'of the United
States 1867-1960, Princeton: Prince-
ton University .Press for the NBER,
1963.
34. GALLMAN, R. E. *Commodity. Out-
put, .1839--1899," in [82,.. Parker,
1960].
35.
"Gross' National Product in
the United States, 1834-1909," in [6,
Brady, 1966].
36. GoLDIN, 'C. D. "The Economics of

Copyright @ 2001. All Rights Reserved.

[[PAGE 24]]
McCloskey: On Economic History

[왼쪽 열]
. Emancipation,' J. Econ: Hist., March
1973, 33(1), pp. 66-85.
37.
. Unpublished manuscript on
urban slavery, forthcoming, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1976.
38. GORDON, D. F, AND WALTON, G. M.
"A New Theory .of Regenerative
:Growth and the Experience of Post
World War II West Germany," un-
published manuscript,; :Oct." 1974,
University of Indiana.
39. GoRDON, R. J. "$45 Billion of U.S.
Private Investment Has Been Mis-
:... laid, Amer. Econ. Rev., June 1969,
59(3), pp. 221-38. :
40.
"Reply to Comment by G.
Jaszi," Amer. Econ. Rev., Dec. 1970,
60(5), Ppp. . 940-45 (see' [55, Jaszi,
1970]).
4I..-GOY, J. AND LE ROY: LADURIE, E.
Les fuctuations du produit de la
Dime. Paris: Mouton, 1972.:
42. GRILICHES, Z. "Errors in Variables
and Other Unobservables,"  Econo-
. metrica,  Nov. : 1974,42(6), ': pp.
971-98.
43. GUIsINGER, S. E. *"The Theory and
Measurement of Effective Protec-
tion--The Case of Pakistan," unpub-
lished doctoral dissertation, Harvard
University, 1970.
44. GUNDERSON, G. :The 'Origin of the
American Civil War," J. Econ. Hist.,
" Dec. 1974, 34(4), pp. 915-50:1
45: HARLEY, C. K. "On the Persistence
of Old Techniques: The-.Case . of
North American Wooden Shipbuild-
ing," J. Econ. Hist., June 1973, 33(2),
pp. 372-98.
46. HARTWELL, R. M, *The Standard of
Living Controversy: A Summary," in
The Industrial Revolution. Edited by
R. M. HARTWELL. Oxford: .Basil
Blackwell, 1970.
47. HICKs, J. R. "An Inaugural Lecture;*
: Oxford Econ. Pap.; N. S., June 1953,
5, pp. 117-35. :
48.
.. A theory of economic history.
Oxford: Clarendon press, 1969.

[오른쪽 열]
457
49. HIGcs, R. The transformation of the
American economy, 1865-1914: An
'essay in interpretation. New York:
Wiley, 1971.
50.
. "Race, Skills, and Earnings:
American Immigrants in 1909, J.
Econ. Hist, June 1971; 31(2), pp.
420-28.
51.
"Patterns' of Farm Rental in
the Georgia' Cotton': Belt, 1880-
'1900, J. Econ. Hist., June 1974, 34
(2), Pp. 468-82.
52. HILL; P. "The Economic Impact of
Immigration into the United States,"
-unpublished doctoral . dissertation,
::. . University of Chicago, 1970.
53. HUECKEL; G. "War and the British
Economy, 1793-1815, A General
Equilibrium Analysis," Explor. Econ.
". Hist., Summer 1973,: 10(4), - pp.
365-96.
54. HUGHES, J: R. T."AND REITER, S.
"The First 1,945 British Steamships,"
J. Amer. Statist. Assoc, June 1958, 53,
pp. 360-81.
55. JAszi, G: "$45 Billion of U.S. Private
"Investment Has Been Mislaid: Com-
ment,"Amer. Econ. Reu, Dec. 1970,
60(5), Pp. 934-39 (see R. J. Gordon's
...*Reply" [40, 1970].
56: JoNEs, A. H. "Wealth Estimates for
the New England Colonies about
1770; J. Econ. Hist., March 1972, 32
(1), pp. 98-127.
57: JoNEs, -G. T.i '"Increasing ' returns.
Cambridge: Cambridge . University
Press, 1933. :
58. KELLEY, A. C. "International Migra-
:  tion and :Economic Growth:' Aus-
: tralia, -1865-1935, J. Econ. Hist.,
Sept. 1965, 25(3), pp. 333-54: :
;WILLIAMSON, -J. G.. AND
59.
CHEETHAM, R. J. Dualistic economic
development: Theory and -history.
Chicago: . - University of Chicago
Press, 1972.
60. KESSEL, R." A: AND ALCHIAN, A. A.
: "Real Wages in the North during the
Civil War: Mitchell's Data Reinter-

Copyright @ 2001. All Rights Reserved.

[[PAGE 25]]
Journal of Economic Literature :

[왼쪽 열]
458 :
preted," J. Law Econ., Oct. 1959, 2,
pp. 95-113.
61. KLOTZ, B. P.AND NEAL, L. D. "Spec-
tral and Cross-Spectral Analysis of
the Long. Swing Hypothesis, Rev.
Econ. Statist., -August 1973, 55(3),
pp. 291-98.
62. KRAVIS, I. B.."Trade as a Hand-
maiden of Growth: Similarities. be-
tween :the Nineteenth : and Twen-
tieth Centuries, Econ. J., Dec. 1970,
80(320), pp. 850-72..:
63. LANDES, W: M. AND SOLMON, L. C.
"Compulsory Schooling Legislation:
An Economic Analysis of Law and
Social Change : in the Nineteenth
Century, J. Econ. Hist., March 1972,
32(1), pp. 54-91.
64. LASLETT, T. P. R.. Household and
family in :past time. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press,. 1972.
65. LEBERGOTT, S. Manpower in eco-
nomic growth: The American record
since 1800. New York: McGraw-Hill,
1964.
66. LEONTIEF; W. "Theoretical Assump-'
tions 'and Nonobserved Facts,"
: Amer. Econ. Rev., March 1971, 61(1),
.pp. 1-7.
67. LEVEEN, E. P. "British Slave Trade
Suppression Policies 1821-1865: Im-
pact and Implications,' unpublished
doctoral dissertation, .University of
Chicago, 1971.
68. LINDERT, P. H. "Land Scarcity and
American Growth," J. Econ. .Hist.,
Dec. 1974, 34(4), pp. 851-84.
69. McCLELLAND, P. D. "The Cost to
America of British Imperial Policy,"
Amer. Econ. Rev., Supplement, May
1969, 59(2), pp. 370-81.
70. McGoULDRICK, P. F. New England
: textiles in the nineteenth century:
Profits and investment. Cambridge,
Mass.: : Harvard . University Press,
1968.
71. MEEKER, E. "The Improving Health:
of the United States,: 1850-1915,"

[오른쪽 열]
Explor: Econ. Hist., Summer 1972, 9
(4), pp. 353-74.
72.
"The-Social Rate of Return
on Investment in Public . Health,
1880--1910," : J.. Econ. Hist., June
1974, 34(2); pp. 392-421.
73. MITCHELL, B. R. WITH DEANE, P.
Abstract of British historical statis-
tics. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity. Press, 1962. :
74. MITcHELL, :W:' C: Business cycles:
The problem. and its setting. New
York: NBER, 1927.
75. NEAL, L. AND UsELDING, P. "Immi-
gration, A Neglected Source of
American Economic Growth: 1790-
:1912," Oxford. Econ. - Pap., :N. S.,
March 1972, 24(1), pp. 68-88.
76. NELSON, R. R. AND WINTER, S. G.
"Neoclassical vs. Evolutionary Theo-
ries of Economic Growth: Critique
and Prospectus," Econ. J., Dec. 1974,
84(336), pp: 886-905.
77. NERLovE, M. *Two Models of the
British Economy: A Fragment of a
Critical Survey, Int'l. Econ. Rev.,
May 1965, 6(2), pp. 127-81.
78. NoRTH, D: C. "Sources of .Produc-
tivity Change in Ocean Shipping,
: 1600--1850,". J. Polit. Econ., Sept./
Oct. 1968, 76(5), pp. 953-70.
79.
AND THOMAS, R. P. The rise
of the . Western : World. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press,. 1973.
80. OLMSTEAD, A. L. "New York City
Mutual Savings Bank Portfolio Man-
agement and Trustee Objectives," J.
Econ. Hist., Dec. 1974, 34(4), pp.
815-34.
8l. OLsoN, M. The economicsof wartime
'shortage, a history of British food
supplies in the Napoleonic Wars and
in World Wars I and I. Durham:
Duke University Press, 1963.
82. PARKER, W. N., ed: .Trends in the
American economy in the nineteenth
century. Conference on Research in
Income and Wealth, Studies in In-

Copyright @ 2001. All Rights Reserved

[[PAGE 26]]
McCloskey: On Economic History

[왼쪽 열]
come and Wealth, Vol. 24. Prince-
ton: . Princeton ' University Press,
1960.
83. PASSELL, P: 'AND SCHMUNDT, M.
"Pre-Civil War Land Policy and the
Growth of Manufacturing," Explor.
Econ. ". Hist., Fall. 1971, 9(1), pp.
35-48.
84.
. AND WRIGHT, G."The Effects
of Pre-Civil War Expansion on the
Price of Slaves," J. Polit. Econ., Nov.!
Dec. 1972, 80(6), pp. 1188-1202.
85. PEPPERS, L. C. "Full-Employment
Surplus Analysis and Structural
Change: The 1930s," Explor: Econ.
Hist., Winter 1973, 10(2), pp. 197-
210.
86. PINCUs, J. "A Positive Theory of Tar-
iff Formation Applied to the 19th-
Century United States," unpublished :
doctoral dissertation, Stanford Uni-
versity, 1972.
87. PoPE, C. "The Impact of the Ante-
Bellum Tariff on Income Distribu-
tion, Explor. Econ. Hist., Summer
1972, 9(4), pp. 375-421.
88. Purdue faculty papers in economic
history 1956-1966. Homewood, Ill.:
-Irwin, 1967.
89. RANSOM, R. AND SUTCH, R. Unpub-
lished book manuscript on post-bel-
lum Southern agriculture, forthcom-
ing.
90. REEs, A. E. Real wages in manu-
facturing, 1890-1914. Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1961.
9l. REID, J. D., JR. "Sharecropping as an
Understandable Market Response:
The Post-Bellum South, J. Econ.
Hist., March 1973, 33(1), pp. :106-
30.
92. RocKoFF, H. T. "The Free Banking
Era: A Reexamination," J. Money,
Credit, Banking, May 1974, 6(2), pp.
141-67.
93.
"Varieties of Banking and
Regional Economic Development in
the United States, 1840-1860," J.

[오른쪽 열]
459
Econ. Hist., March 1975, 35(1), pp.
160-81.
94. RoLL, R. "Interest Rates and Price
Expectations During the Civil War,
J. Econ. Hist., June. 1972, 32(2), pp.
476-98. :
95. RosENBERG, N. Technology 'and
American economic growth. ..New
York: Harper and Row, 1972.
96. RosovskY, H.; ed. Industrialization
in two systems: Essays in honor of
Alexander Gerschenkron, by a group
of his students. New York: Wiley,
1966.
97. RosTow, W. W., ed. The economics
of .take-off into sustained growth.
New York: St. Martin's, 1963.
98. SANDBERG, L: G. Lancashire in de-
cline: A study in entrepreneurship,
technology and international trade.
- Columbus: : Ohio: State University
Press, 1974.
99..SANDERSON, A. . R. "Child-Labor
Legislation and the Labor Force Par-
ticipation of Children," J. Econ. Hist.,
March 1974, 34(1), pp: 297-99.
100. .SCHULTz, T. W, Transforming tradi-
tional agriculture. New Haven: Yale
University Press, 1964.
“Lingering Doubts About
101:
Economics," .. unpublished - paper,
University of Chicago; 1974; Amer.
Econ. Rev., forthcoming.
102. SHEPHERD,J. F: AND WALTON, G. M.
: Shipping, maritime 'trade, and the
economic development of colonial
North America. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1972.
103. SHEPPARD, D. K. The Growth and
+.:; role :of :UK. financial institutions,
1880-1962. London: Methuen, 1971.
104. SIMoN, M. "The United States Bal-
'ance of Payments, 1861-1900,".in
[82, Parker; 1960].
105. SoLow; R. M. Growth theory: An ex-
position. Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1970.
106. SoLTOw, L. Men and wealth in the

Copyright @2001.All Rights Reserved

[[PAGE 27]]
Journal of Economic Literature :

[왼쪽 열]
460
United : States,1850-1870. "New
Haven: Yale University Press, 1975.
107: STIGLER, G. J. ."Does Economics
Have a Useful Past?" Hist. Pol. Econ..
Fall.1969, I(2), Ppp. 217-30. ..
108. SWANSON, J. A. AND WILLIAMSON,
J. G. "Firm Location and Optimal
City Size in American History," in
The new urban history: Quantitative
explorations by American historians.
Edited by L. F. SCHNoRE. Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1974.
109. SYLLA, R. “Federal Policy, Banking
Market Structure and Capital Mobili-
zation in the: United States, 1863-
1913," J. Econ. Hist., Dec. 1969, 29
(4), pp. 657-86:
110. TAUssIG, F. W. The tariff history of
the United States. New York: Put-
nam, 1888.
11l. TEMIN, P. The Jacksonian economy.
New York: Norton, 1969.
112.
, 'ed. New economic history:
Selected Readings. Harmondsworth,
England: Penguin, 1973. :
113.
"The Anglo-American Busi-
ness Cycle, 1820-60, Econ. Hist.
Rev., 2nd ser., May 1974, 27(2), pp.
207-21.
114. THOMAs; B. Migration and economic
growth. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 1954.
115. THOMAs, R. P. "The Sugar Colonies
of the Old Empire: Profit or Loss for
Great Britain?* Econ. Hist. Rev., 2nd
' ser., April 1968, 21(1), pp. 30-45.
116. TITow, J. Z. Winchester yields. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press,
1972.
117. TREVELYAN, G. M. English social
history.. London : and New : York:
Longmans, Green, 1942.
118. U.S. :BUREAU OF THE CENSUS: : His-
torical statistics of the United States,
Colonial times to 1957. Washington:
: U.S.G.P:O.; 1960.
119. U.S. PRESIDENT. Economic report of

[오른쪽 열]
the President.  Washington, ': D.C..
.U.S.G.P.O., 1975.
120. VINER, J. Canada's balance of inter-
national .indebtedness, 1900-1913.
: : Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univer-
sity Press, 1924.
12l: WALToN, G: M. "Sources of Produc-
tivity Change in American Colonial
'Shipping, 1675-1775, Econ. Hist.
Rev., 2nd ser., April 1967, 20(1); pp.
67-78.
122. WEiss, R. W. "The Issue of Paper
Money in the American Colonies;
1720-1774, J : Econ. Hist., Dec.
1970, 30(4), pp. :770-84.
"The Colonial Monetary
123.
Standard of Massachusetts," Econ.
Hist. Rev., 2nd ser., Nov. 1974, 27(4),
pp. 577-92..
124. : WEsT, E. G. "Educational Slowdown
and : Public Intervention in : 19th-
Century England: A Study'in the
Economics of Bureaucracy,! Explor.
Econ. Hist., Jan. 1975, 12(1), pp.
61-87.
125. WHALE, P. B. "The Working of the
Pre-War Gold Standard," Econom-
ica, N.S., Feb. 1937, 4, pp. 18-32.
126. WHITE, H. D. The French interna-
tional accounts, - 1880-1913. Cam-
bridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press, 1933. :.
127. WHITNEY, W. G. "The Structure of
the American Economy in the Late
: 19th Century," unpublished doctoral
dissertation, Harvard University,
1968.
128. WILLIAMS, J. H. Argentine interna-
tional trade under inconvertible pa-
per money: 1880-1900. Cambridge,
Mass.:. Harvard University Press,
:1920. :
129. WiLLIAMsoN, J. G. American growth
and the balance of payments, 1820-
1913. Chapel Hill: University of
North Carolina Press, 1964.
130..
: Late
nineteenth'century

Copyright @ 2001. All Rights Reserved.

[[PAGE 28]]
- McCloskey:. On Economic History. .:

[왼쪽 열]
American development: A general
equilibrium history. London and
New York: Cambridge University
Press, 1974.
131.
"Watersheds and Turning
Points: Conjectures on the Long-
Term Impact of Civil War Financ-
ing," J. Econ. Hist., Sept. 1974, 34(3),
pp. 636-61.
132. WRIGHT, G. "Econometric Studies of
History," in Frontiers of guantitative.
economics. Edited : by M..: D... IN-
TRILIGATOR. Amsterdam: North
Holland, 1971.
133.
"The Political Economy of
New Deal Spending: An Economet-
ric Analysis," Rev. Econ. Statist., Feb.
1974, 56(1);pp. 30-38. :
134. WRiGLEY, E. A. Population'and his-
tory, London: Weidenfeld and Nicol-

[오른쪽 열]
461
son; New York: McGraw-Hill, 1969.
135.
ed. Nineteenth-century so-
ciety: Essays in the use of quantita-
tive methods for the study of social
data. Canbridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 1972.
136.. YASUBA, Y. *The Proftability and Vi-
ability of Plantation Slavery in the
United States, Econ. Stud. Quart.,
Sept. 1961, 12, pp. 60-67; reprinted
in [30, Fogel and Engerman, 1971].
",137. ZELLNER, 'A. AND MURPHY, -G. *Se-
quential Growth, The Labor-Safety-
Valve Doctrine and the Develop-
ment of American Unionism, J.
Econ. Hist., Sept. - 1959, 19(3), pp.
402-21.
138. ZEvIN,'R. B. The Growth of Cotton
Textile. Production after 1815," in
[30, Fogel and Engerman, 1971].

Copyright @2001.All Rights Reserved.

[[PAGE 29]]
Copyright of Journal of Economic Literature is the property of American Economic Association and its content

[왼쪽 열]
may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express
written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.
